

--- Page 703 ---

IN THE NAME OF GOD, MOST MERCIFUL AND COMPASSIONATE

--- Page 705 ---

AI-Hidayah
THE GUIDANCE

--- Page 706 ---

0

--- Page 707 ---

AI-Hiddyah
THE GUIDANCE
Burhãn al-Din al-Farghani al-Marghinani
A TRANSLATION OF AL-HIDAYAH FT SHARH BIDAYAT AL-MUBTADI
A CLASSICAL MANUAL OF HANAFT LAW : VOLUME TWO
Translated from the Arabic with
Commentary and Notes by Imran Ahsan Khan Nyazee
AMAL PRESS
BRISTOL • ENGLAND

--- Page 708 ---

Copyright © 2008 by Imran Ahsan Khan Nyazee.
All rights reserved.
First published by Amal Press (Ltd) 2008
Ama! Press, P0 Box 688, Bristol BS99 3ZR. England
http://www.amalpress.com info@amalpress.com
No part of this book may be reproduced, stored or transmitted in any form or by any means,
electronic or otherwise, including photocopying, recording, internet, or any storage and
retrieval system without prior written permission from Ama! PressTM
A catalogue record for this book is available from the British Library
ISBN 978-0-9552359-4-8
Cover Design: AbdallateefWhiteman/CWDM

--- Page 709 ---

For My Daughter Aamirah

--- Page 711 ---

CONTENTS—BRIEF
Volume Two
BOOK VIII: Talaq (Divorce)(cid:9) 1
BOOK IX: 'Ataq (Emancipation)(cid:9) 103
BOOK X: Aymãn (Vows/Oaths) 151
BOOK XI: Hudüd (Fixed Penalties) 205
BOOK XII: Sariqah (Theft and Highway Robbery) 245
BOOK XIII: Siyar (Relations with Non-Muslims) 285
BOOK XIV Laqit (Foundling) 349
BOOK XV: Luqtah (Found Property) 357
BOOK XVI: Ibaq (Runaway Slaves) 367
BOOK XVII: Mafqud (Missing Person)(cid:9) 373
GLOSSARY(cid:9) 383
INDEX(cid:9) 397

--- Page 712 ---

The Hidãyah(cid:9) CONTENTS-BRIEF

--- Page 713 ---

CONTENTS
Volume Two
BOOK VIII: Talaq (Divorce)(cid:9) 1
Ch. 66: Divorce by Person Suffering From Terminal Illness(cid:9) 3
Ch. 67: Rajah (Recourse to Wife for Retracting Divorce)(cid:9) ii
Sec. 1: What Makes a Divorced Wife Lawful 19
Ch. 68: ha' (Vow of Continence) 23
Ch. 69: Khul' (Redemption) 29
Sec. 1: Khul' (Redemption) 29
Sec. : Divorce in Exchange for Wealth 32
Sec.(cid:9) : Mubãra'ah (Divorce With no Liabilities)
35
Ch. 70: Zihãr (Injurious Assimilation) 37
Sec. 1: Kaffarah (Expiation) 40
Ch. 71: Li'ãn (Imprecation) 49
Ch. 72: Impotence and Other Causes of Divorce 57
Ch. 73: 'Iddah (Waiting Period) 61
Sec. 1: Mourning 68
Ch. 74: Proof of Paternity 73
Ch.(cid:9) Right to Custody of Child
79
Sec. 1: Leaving the City 82
Ch. 76: Nafaqah (Maintenance) 8
Sec. i: Right to Residence 91
Sec. : Divorcees, Widows and Other Cases
93
Sec. : Maintenance of Minor Children
95
Sec.(cid:9) : Maintenance for Parents and Grandparents
97
Sec.(cid:9) : Maintenance for Slaves 102

--- Page 714 ---

iv(cid:9) The Hidãyah(cid:9) CONTENTS
BOOK IX: 'Ataq (Emancipation) 103
Ch. 77: The Legal Status of Emancipation 105
Sec. i: Slave Relatives 111
Ch. 78: Partial Emancipation 115
Ch. 79: Emancipating One of Several Slaves 127
Ch. 80: Oath of Emancipation 133
Ch. 81: Emancipation Through Ju'alah 137
Ch. 82: Emancipation Upon Death of Owner (Tadbir) 141
Ch. 83: Emancipating the Slave Mother 145
BOOK X: Ayman (Vows/Oaths) 151
Ch. 84: The Legal Status of Vows/Oaths 153
Ch. 85: Valid and Invalid Vows/Oaths 155
Sec. 1: Kaffarah (Expiation) 158
Ch. 86: Vows About Entering Houses and Residing There 163
Ch. 87: Entering and Leaving Buildings, and Other Matters 167
Ch. 88: Vows About Eating and Drinking 171
Ch. 89: Vows About Speaking 179
Sec. 1: On Duration 182
Ch. o: Vows About Emancipation and Divorce 185
Ch. i: Vows About Sale, Purchase and Marriage 189
Ch. 92: Vows About Hajj, Prayer and Fasting 193
Ch. 93: Vows About Dresses and Jewellery 197
Ch. 94: Vows About Homicide and Causing Injury 199
Ch. 95: Vows About the Demand of Dirhams 201
Ch. 96: Scattered Issues 203
BOOK XI: Hudud (Fixed Penalties)(cid:9) 205
Ch. 97: The Meaning and Proof of Hadd (cid:9) 207
Ch. 98: The Nature of Intercourse That Gives Rise to Hadd (cid:9) 211
Ch. 99: Testimony of Hadd and its Retraction(cid:9) 219
Ch. 100: The Hadd for Drinking Khamr (cid:9) 229
Ch. 101: The Hadd of Qadhf (cid:9) 233
Sec. i: Ta'zir (cid:9) 242
BOOK XII: Sariqah (Theft and Highway Robbery)(cid:9) 245
Ch. 102: The Legal Status of Sariqah(cid:9) 247

--- Page 715 ---

CONTENTS(cid:9) The Hidãyah(cid:9) v
Ch. 103: Theft That Gives Rise to Punishment of Amputation 251
Ch. 104: Place of Safe Custody (Hirz)(cid:9) 259
Ch. 105: Mode of Amputation and its Proof (cid:9) 265
Ch. 106: Mode of Stealing Property and Related Issues(cid:9) 275
Ch. 107: Highway Robbery (Qat' al-Tariq)(cid:9) 279
BOOK XIII: Siyar (Relations With Non-Muslims)(cid:9) 285
Ch. io8: The Legal Status of jihad 287
Ch. 1o9: The Rules of Warfare 291
Ch. ho: Negotiating Cessation of Hostilities and Safe Conduct 295
Sec. i: Safe Conduct 297
Ch. iii: Spoils of War and Their Division 301
Sec. i: Modes of Division 309
Sec.(cid:9) : Rewards 313
Ch. iii: Conquests by the Unbelievers 317
Ch. iii: Entering Enemy Territory on Amãn 323
Sec. 1: Granting Entry to the Enemy 325
Ch. 114: 'Ushr and K/iaraj 329
Ch. 115: Jizyah (Poll Tax) 335
Sec. 1: Rights and Duties of the Dhimmis 339
Sec.(cid:9) : Christians of Banü Taghlib 341
Ch. 116: Rebels (Bughat) 343
BOOK XIV: Laqit (Foundling)(cid:9) 349
Ch. ii: The Legal Status of the Foundling(cid:9) 351
Ch. 118: Managing the Affairs of the Foundling(cid:9) 355
BOOK XV: Luqtah (Found Property)(cid:9) 357
Ch. n: The Legal Status of Found Property(cid:9)
359
Ch. 120: Claims on Found Property and its Identification(cid:9) 361
BOOK XVI: Ibaq (Runaway Slaves)(cid:9) 367
Ch. iii: The Legal Status of the Runaway Slave(cid:9) 369
Ch. 122: Returning the Slave and Compensation(cid:9) 371
BOOK XVII: Mafqud (Missing Person)(cid:9) 373

--- Page 716 ---

vi(cid:9) The Hidãyah(cid:9) CONTENTS
Ch. 123: The Missing Person and his Wealth(cid:9) 375
Ch. 124: The Wife of the Missing Person(cid:9) 379
GLOSSARY(cid:9) 383
INDEX(cid:9) 397

--- Page 717 ---

Al-Hidãyah
BOOK EIGHT
Talaq
(Divorce)
Ch. 66: Divorce by Person Suffering From Terminal Illness(cid:9) 3
Ch. 67: Rajah (Recourse to Wife for Retracting Divorce)(cid:9) 11
Sec. 1: What Makes a Divorced Wife Lawful(cid:9) 19
Ch. 68: ha' (Vow of Continence)(cid:9) 23
Ch. 69: Khul' (Redemption)(cid:9) 29
Sec. 1: Khul' (Redemption)(cid:9) 29
Sec. : Divorce in Exchange for Wealth(cid:9) 32
Sec. : Mubãra'ah (Divorce With no Liabilities)(cid:9) 35
Ch. 70: ?ihär (Injurious Assimilation)(cid:9) 37
Sec. i: Kaffarah (Expiation)(cid:9) 40
(cid:9)
Ch. 71: Li'ãn (Imprecation) 49
Ch. 72: Impotence and Other Causes of Divorce(cid:9) 57
Ch. 73: 'Iddah (Waiting Period)(cid:9) 61
Sec. i: Mourning(cid:9) 68
Ch. 74: Proof of Paternity(cid:9) 73
Ch. 75: Right to Custody of Child(cid:9) 79
Sec. 1: Leaving the City(cid:9) 82

--- Page 718 ---

(cid:9)
Ch. 76: Nafaqah (Maintenance) 85
Sec. i: Right to Residence(cid:9) 91
Sec. : Divorcees, Widows and Other Cases(cid:9) 93
Sec. : Maintenance of Minor Children(cid:9) 95
Sec. : Maintenance for Parents and Grandparents(cid:9) 97
Sec. : Maintenance for Slaves

--- Page 719 ---

Chapter 66
Divorce by Person Suffering From Terminal Illness
IJLLhJr4
He for whom God wills His blessings is
granted the fiqh of Din
In the Name of God, Most Merciful and Compassionate, and (with)
prayers and blessings on Muhammad and his family.
If a man divorces his wife, during his terminal illness, through an irrevo-
cable (bã'in)' repudiation and then dies while she is still in her waiting
period, she will inherit from him. If he dies after the termination of the
waiting period, she is not entitled to inheritance. A1-Shãfi'i (God bless
him) said that she will not inherit in either case,2 because the state of
being married has been annulled due to this obstacle' where marriage
was the basis (of inheritance), therefore, even he will not inherit from her
if she dies.
'For the meaning of Win divorce and its legal effects, see fn 4011 page 569 in Volume
I of this translation; see also section 67.1 (What Makes a Divorced Wife Lawful) in this
volume on p. 14.
According to al-'Ayni this means before the waiting period and after the waiting
2
period. Al-'Ayni, vol. 5, 440. The text indicates, however, that it means if he dies during
her 'iddah or after such waiting period.
The obstacle of irrevocable repudiation
3

--- Page 720 ---

4(cid:9) Al-Hidayah(cid:9) BOOK VIII: DIVORCE
Our argument is that the state of marriage is the cause of her inher-
itance during his terminal illness, and the husband intended its annul-
ment,4 therefore, his intention is restrained by delaying the operation of
the divorce up to the time of the termination of the waiting period in
order to avert injury to the wife, which is possible. The reason is that dur-
ing the waiting period some of the legal effects of nikãh remain. Conse-
quently, it is permissible that they remain with respect to her inheritance
from him.5 This is distinguished from the situation after the termination
of the waiting period when there is no possibility (of delaying the oper-
ation of divorce). The state of marriage in this situation is not the basis
of his inheriting from her, therefore, inheritance is annulled in his case,
especially due to his consenting to it.'
If he divorces her thrice upon her request7 or he says to her, "choose'
and she chooses herself' or obtains khul' (redemption) from him, and
then he dies, while she is in her waiting period, she will not inherit from
him. The reason is that she consented to the annulment of her right and
the extinction of the delayed operation of her claim.9 If she says, "Divorce
me through a revocable repudiation' but he divorces her thrice, she will
inherit from him, because a revocable repudiation does not eliminate
marriage. In this case, she does not consent to the annulment of her right.
If he says to her during his terminal illness, "I had divorced you
thrice during my period of health and now you have completed your
waiting period" and she verifies it, following which the husband acknowl-
edges a debt that he owes her or makes a bequest in her favour, then,
according to AbU Hanifah (God bless him) she is entitled to the lesser
of this amount or inheritance. AbU Yüsuf and Muhammad (God bless
them) said: His acknowledgement and bequest are valid. If he divorces
her thrice during his illness upon her request and then acknowledges a
debt or makes a bequest in her favour, she will have the lesser of this
amount or inheritance according to the view of all three jurists. Accord-
ing to Zufar (God bless him) she will have the entire bequest amount
4That is, the annulment of her inheritance.
51n order to avoid injury to her.
'By declaring his intention to terminate the contract of marriage irrevocably
through the repudiation.
7Like her saying during his illness, "Divorce me thrice."
'Chooses divorce.
'Till the end of her 'iddah.

--- Page 721 ---

BOOK VIII: DIVORCE(cid:9) Al-Hidãyah(cid:9) 5
and what has been acknowledged, because inheritance has been annulled
upon her request and this has removed the obstacle in the way of the
validity of acknowledgement and bequest.
The reasoning of the two jurists in the first issue is that when both
(husband and wife) mutually verified the occurrence of divorce and the
termination of the waiting period, she became like a stranger for him so
much so that it is permitted to him to marry her sister, thus, any suspi-
cion (of the persistence of the relationship) that there was is eliminated.
Do you not see that his testimony in her support will be admissible, and
payment of zakãt to her will be valid. This is different from the second
issue where the waiting period subsists and is a cause for the suspicion
(of the continuing relationship). The rule turns on the evidence of such
suspicion and invokes the implications of nikãh1° and close relationship."
In the first issue, the waiting period does not exist.
Abü Hanifah's reasoning is that in both issues the suspicion still exists,
because the woman may have chosen to pave the way for acknowledge-
ment and bequest in her favour so that her share increases. The spouses
sometimes mutually agree to acknowledge separation and termination
of the waiting period so that the husband may grant her his wealth in
excess of her inheritance. This suspicion operates upon excess, therefore,
we have rejected it in this case. There is no suspicion in the case of the
amount of inheritance, therefore, we deem it valid. There is normally no
mutual compact in the case of the right to zakãt, (another) marriage, and
testimony. Consequently, there is no suspicion in the case of these rules.
He said: If a person is under siege or is participating in battle and
divorces his wife thrice, she will not inherit from him. If he has a duel
with some person or is brought forth for execution on account of qisas
(retaliation) or for rajm (stoning to death), she will inherit if he dies in
this way or is killed. The source of this rule is what we have elaborated,
that is, the wife of a person evading the rules of inheritance (rrr) will
inherit on the basis of istihsãn. The rule of the evader is established when
the right of the wife is linked to his wealth. This linkage is established
through illness in which there is usually an apprehension of death, like
his being bed-ridden in a state where he cannot take care of his basic
needs as does one in sound health. The rule for the evader is sometimes
'°Where he cannot marry her sister, for example.
"The testimony of one close relative for another is not admissible.

--- Page 722 ---

6(cid:9) Al-Hidäyah(cid:9) BOOK VIII: DIVORCE
established through situations that acquire the meaning of death-illness
with respect to the likelihood of the occurrence of death. Situations in
which the usual result is survival do not lead to the application of the
rule of the evader. Thus, for a person under siege and one participating
in battle the usual result is survival, because a fort is meant to repel enemy
attacks, and likewise defence in battle, thus, the rule of the evader is not
established. The person who takes part in a duel or is brought forth for
execution will most likely die, therefore, the rule of the evader is estab-
lished. There are other cases similar to these that can be classified under
this rule. His statement (in the matn), "If he dies in this way or is killed"
is evidence of the fact that it makes no difference if he dies as a result of
this cause or dies through another cause, just like the person suffering
from terminal illness if he is killed.
A man says to his wife, when he is in sound health, "When the next
month commences" or "When you enter the house" or "When so and
so offers the zuhr prayer" or "When so and so enters the house," "then
you stand divorced?' If these occurrences take place when the husband is
terminally ill, she will not inherit. If the statements were issued in a state
of marad (illness), she will inherit, except in the case of the statement
"When you enter the house?" This case has many forms. Divorce is either
made contingent upon the arrival of a time or upon the act of a stranger
or his own act or the act of the wife. Each of these variations has two
further forms: (i) divorce is made contingent during sound health when
the condition occurs during illness; and both things take place during
(2)
illness.
As for the first two forms in which the condition is associated with the
arrival of time, where he says, "When the next month commences, you
stand divorced?' or it is associated with the act of a stranger, where he says,
"When so and so enters the house' or "When so and so offers the zuhr
prayer," if the association and the occurrence take place during illness, she
is entitled to inheritance. The reason is that the intention to evade inher-
itance stands verified by his pronouncing a contingent divorce in a state
when her right stands linked to his wealth. If the stipulation takes place in
health and the occurrence stipulated takes place during illness, she is not
entitled to inheritance. Zufar (God bless him) said that she does inherit,
because association with a happening moves the time of stipulation to
the time of occurrence, thus, it is as if the stipulation was made during
illness. We maintain that prior stipulation becomes a repudiation at the

--- Page 723 ---

BOOK VIII: DIVORCE(cid:9) Al-Hidayah(cid:9) 7
time of occurrence of the stipulated happening in the legal sense and not
the intended sense. Injustice can only take place if intended, therefore, his
act is not rejected.
As for the third form, which is the making of divorce contingent
upon his own act, it is the same if the stipulation was during health
and the occurrence during illness or whether these were during illness,
or whether the act is such that there is a way out of it for him, he will be
an evader due to the existence of the intention to nullify marriage either
through the stipulation or by bringing about the occurrence during ill-
ness. If he does not have a way out of the occurrence of the act stipulated,
he does have a thousand ways out of the stipulation itself, therefore, his
act is rejected, in order to avoid injury to her.
As for the fourth form in which he makes divorce contingent upon
her act, if the stipulation and occurrence are during illness and the act
is one in which there is a way out for her, like speaking to Zayd and so
on, she will not inherit as she has consented to the divorce. If the act
is one in which there is no way out for her, like the eating of food, the
afternoon prayer, speaking to parents, she will inherit, because she was
under a compulsion to undertake an act to ward off the fear of perishing
either in this world or the next, and there is no consent in a state of duress.
If, however, the stipulation is made in health and the occurrence is
during illness, then, if the act is one in which there is a way out for her,
there is no ambiguity that she will not inherit. If there is no way out for
her from the act, then the response is the same according to Muhammad
(God bless him), which is also the view of Zufar (God bless him), because
there is no act on the part of the husband after her right has become
linked to his wealth. According to AbU Hanifah and Abft Yüsuf (God bless
them), she will inherit, because the husband has compelled her to under-
take the act, therefore, the act is reverted back to him. It is as if she has
become an instrument in his hands, as in the case of coercion (ikrãh).
He said: If he divorces her thrice when he is ill and thereafter recov-
ers and then dies, she will not inherit. Zufar (God bless him) said that
she will inherit, because he intended evasion of inheritance insofar as he
pronounced it during illness, and he died thereafter while she was in her
'iddah (waiting period). We say that when illness is followed by recovery
it acquires the status of sound health, because terminal illness becomes
non-existent due to recovery. This makes it evident that no right of hers
became linked to his wealth. Accordingly, the husband did not become

--- Page 724 ---

8(cid:9) Al-Hid*yah(cid:9) BOOK VIII: DIVORCE
an evader. If he had divorced her and then she became an apostate, God
forbid, and then converted back to Islam after which the husband died
due to his illness, while she was in her waiting period, she would not
have inherited. If she does not become an apostate, but submits for sex-
ual intercourse to her husband's son, she will inherit. The reason for the
distinction is that by apostasy she nullified her legal capacity to inherit,
as the apostate does not inherit from anyone, and inheritance is not pos-
sible without legal capacity. By submitting (for sex) she did not annul her
legal capacity, because entering the prohibited category for marriage does
not negate inheritance, which remains. This is different from submitting
for sex during the validity of marriage, because it gives rise to separation,
therefore, she consents to the nullification of the cause (of inheritance).
After the three repudiations, the prohibition is not established through
submission to sex as the three divorces were prior in time to the submis-
sion, therefore, the two cases are distinguished.
If a person commits qadhf (false accusation of unlawful sexual
intercourse) against his wife when he is healthy, but then subjects her
to the li'n (imprecation) procedure when he is ill, she will inherit.
Muhammad (God bless him) said that she will not inherit. If the accusa-
tion is during illness, she will inherit according to the unanimous view
of all three jurists. This is related to divorce being contingent upon an act
in which there is no way out for her as she is constrained to have recourse
to legal disputation to ward off the shame of zinã from herself.
If he makes a vow of continence (ha') to stay away from her when he
is in sound health, and then she is separated irrevocably from him when
he is ill, she does not inherit. If the vow too was made during illness, she
will inherit. The reason is that ha' amounts to a divorce made contingent
upon the passage of four months that are devoid of sexual contact. Thus,
it is linked with the stipulation based upon the passage of time, and we
have elaborated its underlying reasoning.
He (God be pleased with him) said: In a divorce where he possesses
the right of retraction, she will inherit in all cases, because of what we
elaborated, that is, marriage is not dissolved when intercourse can be law-
fully undertaken. Thus, the cause (of inheritance) continues to exist."
"See the first issue in this discussion.

--- Page 725 ---

BOOK VIII: DIVORCE(cid:9) Al-Hidyah
He said: In each case where we have said that she will inherit, she
inherits if he dies when she is in her waiting period. We have elaborated
this. Allah, the Exalted, knows what is correct.

--- Page 726 ---

10(cid:9) Al-Hidayah(cid:9) BOOK VIII: DIVORCE

--- Page 727 ---

Chapter 67
Raj'ah (Recourse to Wife for Retracting Divorce)
If a man divorces his wife through a revocable repudiation or two repu-
diations, he may have recourse to her during her waiting period whether
or not she consents to this.' This is based upon the words of the Exalted,
"Take them back on equitable terms,"' without further detail (about the
consent of women in such a case). The waiting period must still be con-
tinuing, because retraction is the continuation of the ownership (of the
benefits of nikãh). Do you not see that it has been called imsãk (taking
back), which is continuation. The continuation (of ownership) is realised
within the waiting period, because there is no ownership once the waiting
period terminates.
Raj'ah takes place by his saying, "I have taken you back" or "I have
taken my wife back?' This is the clear statement about raj'ah and there is
no disagreement among the jurists about this.
He said: Or he has intercourse with her, or kisses her, or fondles her
with desire, or looks at her vagina with desire. This is the position in our
view. Al-Shãfi'I (God bless him) said that raj'ah is not valid except by a
formal expression where he possesses the ability to speak, because raj'ah
has the status of the initial marriage contract so much so that it is pro-
hibited to have intercourse with the woman.' In our view, it is the seeking
of the continuance of nikãh, as we have elaborated and we will be estab-
lishing it again,4 God willing. The occurrence of the act (of retraction) is
'There is consensus (ijma') on this point. A1-'Ayni, Vol. 5, 455.
'Qur'an 2:231
3That is, according to al-Shafi'i. Thus, intercourse is not permitted in this case with-
out formal expression of retraction, in his view.
4At the end of the chapter that a revocable divorce does not prohibit intercourse.
11

--- Page 728 ---

12(cid:9) A1-Hidayah(cid:9) BOOK VIII: DIVORCE
an evidence of the attempt to continue it as in the case of the termination
of an option. This evidence is found due to an act that is specific to mar-
riage. These acts (mentioned) are specific to it in the case of a freewoman5
as against fondling and looking without desire, because such acts may be
permitted without marriage as well, as in the case of the physician, the
midwife and others. A glance at the body other than the vagina occurs
in the case of those residing together, and the husband is living with the
wife during 'iddah. If such other acts were to amount to raj'ah, he would
have to divorce her again, thus, prolonging her 'iddah.'
He (al-Quduri) said: It is recommended that two witnesses testify to
the act of retraction, but if they do not testify, the act of retraction is
(still) valid. Al-Sháfi'i (God bless him), in one of his two opinions, said
that it is not valid, which is also the view of Mãlik (God bless him), due to
the words of the Exalted, "Thus when they (are about to) fulfil their term
appointed, either take them back on equitable terms or part with them
on equitable terms; and take for witness two persons from among you7
because a command necessitates obligation. In our view, the divorce laid
down in the texts' is devoid of the restriction of testimony. Further, it is
the seeking of continuation of marriage and testimony is not a condition
during a state of continuation as in retraction during ha', except that it
is recommended for additional precaution so that denial is not incurred
in it. What he (al-Sháfi'i) has recited is construed to mean this. Do you
not see that He has associated it with separation, therefore, for rajah it is
recommended. It is also recommended that he (the husband) inform her
about retraction so that she does not fall into sin.9
When the waiting period terminates, and he says, "I took her back
during the waiting period," it amounts to retraction if she confirms it,
but if she does not deem him truthful it is her statement that will be
given preference. The reason is that he is reporting something that he
cannot initiate at that time. His statement will be suspicious, except that
1n whose case marriage is necessary for the permissibility of these acts.
5
'And that would amount to an injury to the woman, which is not permitted due to
the words of the Exalted, "Take them back on equitable terms." Qur'an 2: 231
7Qur'an 65: 2
8Qur'an 2: 228, 229: "And their husbands have the better right to take them back in
that period' and "the parties should either hold together on equitable terms, or separate
with kindness."
When the husband has intercourse with her when the 'iddah is actually over and he
9
is not aware of it.

--- Page 729 ---

BOOK VIII: DIVORCE(cid:9) Al-Hidãyah(cid:9) 13
with verification the suspicion is removed. In this case, she is not to be
administered an oath according to AbU klanifah (God bless him). This is
one of the issues that pertains to oaths in six things and that has preceded
in the Book of Nikãh.
If the husband says, "I have taken you back,"" and in response to this
she says, "My waiting period is over:' the retraction is not valid accord-
ing to Abü Hanifah (God bless him). The two jurists said that retraction
is valid as it has coincided with the 'iddah, for it still remains prima facie
until she informs him of it, and in this case it has preceded such infor-
mation. Accordingly, if he were to say, "I divorced you" and she says
in response, "My waiting period is over," then divorce takes place. AbU
Hanifah's reasoning is that it has coincided with the state of termina-
tion of the 'iddah, because a woman is deemed trustworthy with respect
to the report about termination." Thus, when a woman makes such a
report it indicates that termination was prior (to retraction), because the
statement about the termination is the closest to the statement of the hus-
band.12 The issue of divorce is a matter of dispute," but even if it was a
matter of agreement divorce would take place through his admission after
termination (of the waiting period). Retraction, on the other hand, is not
established through admission (iqrar).
If the husband of a slave woman, after the termination of her wait-
ing period, says "I took her back," and the owner (of the woman) deems
him truthful, but she does not, then, it is her statement that will be given
precedence, according to AbU klanifah (God bless him). The two jurists
said that the statement of the owner will be given precedence. The reason
is that her body is owned by the master, and he has acknowledged what is
purely his right in favour of the husband, therefore, his statement resem-
bles his acknowledging her marriage to him. He (Abü Hanifah) argues
that the rule of rajah is structured upon the waiting period, and the state-
ment to be given precedence about the waiting period is her statement;
likewise in a matter that is based upon it. Had the situation been the
"The text in al-'Ayni is: "I have taken you back within the 'iddah."
"That is, trustworthy with respect to reports about what is in their wombs. Allah
Almighty has said: "Nor is it lawful for them to hide what Allah Hath created in their
wombs, if they have faith in Allah and the Last Day." Qur'ãn 2 228.
"Had she remained silent for some time and then made her statement the position
would have been different.
13Due to the absence of witnesses.

--- Page 730 ---

14(cid:9) A1-Hidayah(cid:9) BOOK VIII: DIVORCE
reverse14 then according to the two jurists, the statement preferred would
be that of the master, and so also in his view according to the authentic
report, because she has passed the waiting period at that time and the
ownership of the master over her benefits has taken over, therefore, her
statement annulling such ownership is not valid. This is distinguished
from the first situation, because in that the owner, through his verifica-
tion of the waiting period, is acknowledging the existence of the waiting
period for her and his ownership does not take over with the existence of
the 'iddah. If she were to say, "My waiting period is over," and the hus-
band as well as the master were to say, "Your waiting period is not over:'
then the preferable statement is hers. The reason is that she is trustwor-
thy in this respect for she has knowledge of it.
When the blood from the third period of menses ceases to flow after
ten days, retraction (rajah) stands excluded, even though she has not
bathed. If it ceases to flow in less than ten days, retraction is not excluded
until she takes a bath or one complete timing of prayer passes after it.
The reason is that there is no excess over ten days for menses,15 therefore,
by mere termination (of bleeding) she moves out of her period of menses
and her waiting period is terminated, thus excluding the retraction. In
what is less than ten days, there is a probability of resumption of bleed-
ing, therefore, the reality of termination of bleeding must be strengthened
with bathing by abiding by one of the rules that are to be followed by
women in a state of ritual purity, that is, through the passing of one
timing of prayer. This case is distinguished from that of a Kitabiyyah,16
because in her case the rule is not based on one of these additional fac-
tors, and it is actual termination (of bleeding) that is deemed sufficient.
The bleeding is deemed to be terminated17 when she performs tayammum
and prays, according to Abü Hanifah and Abü Yüsuf (God bless them).
This is based upon istihsãn. According to Muhammad (God bless him),
the period terminates when she performs tavammum. This is based upon
analogy, because tayatnmum in the absence of water is considered abso-
lute purification so much so that the ahkãm established through bathing
are established for it too. Thus, it has the same status as bathing. The two
'4With the owner deeming him untruthful and the woman deeming him truthful.
According to legal rules.
15
16 Christian or Jew.
1n case of bleeding for less than ten days.
17

--- Page 731 ---

BOOK VIII: DIVORCE(cid:9) Al-Hidayah(cid:9) 15
jurists maintain that it is a pollutant" and does not (actually) purify. It
has been deemed purification (legally) due to necessity so that the obli-
gations do not multiply. This necessity is realised in a state of performing
prayer and not in the timings prior to it.19 Likewise the rules established
are also those demanded by necessity. Thereafter, it is said that 'iddah ter-
minates by commencement itself in the opinion of the two jurists, and it
is said after completion so that the ruling of validity of prayer is estab-
lished.20
When she bathes and forgets to wash a part of her body on which
water does not flow, then, if this is a limb or more retraction is not cut
off, but if it is less than a limb, it is cut off. He (God be pleased with him)
said: This is istihsãn, while analogy in the case of a complete limb is that
raj'ah should not remain, because she has washed most of her body. Anal-
ogy in what is less than a limb is that raj'ah should remain, because the
rule for major ritual impurity and menstruation cannot be split up. The
interpretation associated with istihsãn is the difference, that is, in what is
less than a limb is subject to drying up due to its small size, therefore, one
cannot be certain of water having reached it. Thus, we said that it cuts
off raj'ah. It is, however, not permitted to her to marry on the basis of
precaution about both," as distinguished from a complete limb as that is
not subject to swift drying up and usually its dryness is not ignored. The
two, therefore, stand distinguished. It is reported from Abü Yüsuf (God
bless him) that neglecting gargling and drawing water into the nostrils
(madmadah and istinshaq) is the same as neglecting a complete limb. It
is also reported from him, and it is the view of Muhammad (God bless
him), that it is of the status of what is less than a limb, because there is
a disagreement about their being a definitive obligation as compared to
the rest of the limbs.
If a man divorces his wife when she is pregnant or gives birth to a
child from it,22 and he says, "I did not have intercourse with her," he
has a right to take her back. The reason is that when pregnancy becomes
apparent during a period in which it can be assumed that it is from the
18 Actually, but not legally.
'91n which the state of 'iddah will continue.
"As finding water during prayer will nullify tayammum.
"The exclusion of raj'ah and marriage.
"That is, from the marriage giving birth to the child prior to divorce. His statement,
"I did not have intercourse with her" will not be accorded significance.

--- Page 732 ---

16(cid:9) Al-Hidayah(cid:9) BOOK VIII: DIVORCE
marriage, it is deemed to have arisen due to the marriage. This is based
upon the words of the Prophet (God bless him and grant him peace),
"The child belongs to one who has legal access for intercourse."" This is
an evidence of intercourse on his part. Likewise, if the paternity of the
child is attributed to him; he will be deemed to have had intercourse.
When intercourse is established, lawful ownership of the benefits of mar-
riage is established, and divorce is part of such established ownership,
which is followed by retraction. His belief (statement) will be nullified by
the denial issued by the shari'ah. Do you not see that with such inter-
course the attribute of ihsãn is established. Thus, raj'ah has a higher
priority for being affirmed (available). The interpretation of the issue of
giving birth to the child is that she give birth prior to divorce, because
giving birth after divorce will terminate the waiting period through birth
itself, and raj'ah cannot be conceived in such a case.
He said: If he secludes himself with her and closes the door or draws
the curtain and then says that he did not have intercourse with her, but
thereafter divorces her, he does not possess the right of retraction. The
reason is that ownership (of benefits) is established through intercourse
and he has acknowledged its absence. He, thus, affirms it against himself
for retraction is his right. He is not deemed untruthful by law as distin-
guished from dower (mahr), because the affirmation of the stated dower
is based upon delivering the counter-value not upon actual possession, as
distinguished from the first case.24
If he takes her back, meaning thereby after being in seclusion with
her, and saying, "I did not have intercourse with her;' and thereafter she
gives birth to a child in a period that is less than two years by one day,25
the retraction is valid. The reason is that paternity stands attributed to
him as she did not acknowledge the termination of the 'iddah and the
child stays in her womb during this period,26 therefore, he will be deemed
to have undertaken intercourse prior to divorce and not after it, because
231t is related through many chaniiels. One version related by Abü Hurayrah (God be
pleased with him) is recorded by all the six sound compilations. A1-Zayla'i, vol. 3, 236.
24This means that in the case of dower all that is required is being available for inter-
course through valid seclusion not actual intercourse. This is not the case for retraction.
25 From the day of divorce and not the day of retraction.
26 This may appear strange to some who may consider the jurists to be simpletons
unaware of scientific knowledge that we possess today. The wisdom behind the law has
to be discovered beginning with the preceding tradition and the welfare of the child,
who cannot be adopted according to Islamic law.

--- Page 733 ---

BOOK VIII: DIVORCE(cid:9) Al-Hidayah(cid:9) 17
in the latter case ownership is extinguished by divorce itself due to its
absence prior to (final) divorce, thus, such intercourse is prohibited and
a Muslim does not indulge in harãm.
If he says to her, "When you give birth you stand divorced' and she
gives birth to a child. Thereafter, she gives birth to another child. This
amounts to rajah. This means from another pregnancy, which means
that it should be after six months, and even if it is after more than two
years as long as she did not acknowledge the termination of the waiting
period. The reason is that divorce took place with the birth of the first
child leading to the observance of the waiting period. The second child is,
therefore, through the conception due to him during the waiting period.
As she did not acknowledge the termination of the waiting period he will
be deemed to have taken her back.
If he says, "Each time you give birth to a child, you are divorced,""
and she gives birth to three children through different pregnancies, then,
the first child amounts to divorce and the second child is retraction, and
so also the third. The reason is that when she gives birth to the first child,
it amounts to divorce and she enters the waiting period; with the sec-
ond he becomes one who has retracted divorce, as we have explained
that he caused the conception through fresh intercourse during 'iddah.
The second divorce occurs with the birth of the second child, because the
oath has been qualified with the word "whenever:' and the waiting period
becomes obligatory. With the birth of the third child he becomes one who
retracts divorce, due to what we mentioned, and the third divorce takes
place with the third birth. The waiting period now becomes obligatory
through the menstrual periods, as she was free of pregnancy having her
periods when the third divorce took place.
A woman divorced through a revocable repudiation may become
noticeable and seek adornment. The reason is that she is lawful for her
husband and the relationship of marriage subsists between them. There-
after, retraction is recommended and adornment attracts him to her,
therefore, it is lawful.
It is recommended for the husband that he is not to approach her
unless he seeks her permission or makes his approach known to her
through the sound of his shoes. This means when he does not intend
This type of statement is not conceivable from a rational person, unless he is playing
27
games with his wife. It is obvious that it is a hypothetical example to explain the limits
of the rule.

--- Page 734 ---

18(cid:9) Al-Hidayah(cid:9) BOOK VIII: DIVORCE
retraction, because it is likely that she may be uncovered, and his sight
may rest on parts that amount to retraction. He will then have to divorce
her again and this will prolong her waiting period.
He is not to take her on a journey with him until he seeks witnesses
to testify retraction. According to Zufar (God bless him), he has a right to
do so as the bond of marriage exists between them. This is the reason, in
our view, of permitting the husband to have intercourse with her. We rely
on the words of the Exalted, "And turn them not out of their houses.)2S
Further, delay in the operation of the nullifying act (divorce) is due to the
need of the husband to retract. If he does not take her back till the waiting
period terminates, it becomes obvious that he did not have such a need.
Thus, it becomes evident that the nullifying act operated in accordance
with his wishes from the start for which reason the menstrual periods
were reckoned for the waiting period. Thus, the husband does not possess
the right to take her out, unless he seeks witnesses for his retraction. This
will annul the waiting period and reestablish the husband's ownership.
The meaning of his taking witnesses is the recommendation to do so that
we mentioned earlier.
A revocable divorce does not prohibit intercourse. A1-Shãfi'i (God
bless him) said that it does prohibit it, because the state of marriage
stands dissolved due to a terminating factor, which is divorce. We main-
tain that it subsists so that he possesses the right of retraction without
her permission, because the right of retraction was established keeping
in mind the husband so as to enable him to make amends when faced
with remorse. This concept leads to retraction being a continuation of
the contract of marriage. It also leads to its being a continuation and not
a renewal (of the marriage contract),29 which is negated by the evidence
(of retraction being for the husband). The operation of the nullifying fac-
tor has been delayed for a period due to consensus3° or for his benefit, as
has preceded.
28 Qur'an 65: i.
29 Response to al-Shafi'i's claim that it is dissolved.
"For even al-Shafi'i (God bless him) agrees that rajah through a formal expression
without the consent of the woman is valid.

--- Page 735 ---

BOOK VIII: DIVORCE(cid:9) Al-Hidãyah(cid:9) 19
67.1 WHAT MAKES A DIVORCED WIFE LAWFUL
When the divorce is irrevocable, but is through less than three repu-
diations, he may marry her during her waiting period or after it. The
reason is that lawfulness of the subject-matter still remains for its com-
plete removal is contingent upon the third repudiation, and is not present
prior to it. Such permissibility for another (man) is due to the resulting
confusion about paternity, but no such confusion exists (for the husband)
as a result of the permission (by the Lawgiver).
If the divorce is through three repudiations for a freewoman, and
two for a slave, she cannot become lawful for him until she marries
another husband through a valid marriage and he has intercourse with
her, and who thereafter divorces her or dies while married to her. The
source in this are the words of the Exalted, "So if a husband divorces
his wife (irrevocably), he cannot, after that, remarry her until after she
has married another husband and he has divorced her."" The meaning
(in the verse) is the third repudiation. Two repudiations in the case of
the slave woman are like three in the case of a freewoman. The reason is
that slavery, as was known,32 makes the subject-matter half with respect
to permissibility. The purpose is marriage with a husband in absolute
terms.33 Such a relationship is established through a valid marriage, while
the condition of intercourse is established through the indication of the
text (ishãrat al-nass), which is done by construing the word nikãh to
mean intercourse, a construction that conveys a complete meaning and
avoids repetition, because the words "contract of marriage" are under-
stood from the unqualified use of the term "husband."34 This meaning
can also be added to the meaning of the text through the well known tra-
dition, which in the words of the Prophet (God bless him and grant him
peace) is: "She does not become lawful for the first until she has tasted
31Qur'an 2 230
321n usül al-Jiqh.
"This means that the husband may be a major or a minor or even an insane person,
provided that such a person is capable of intercourse.
341n the verse, the word nikah in one of its senses means intercourse. In this sense,
the translation will read, "until after she has had intercourse with another husband and
he has divorced her." The reason is that the term husband already conveys the meaning
of marriage. Had intercourse not been implied, the words, "Until she takes another
husband, who then divorces her' would have been sufficient.

--- Page 736 ---

20(cid:9) Al-Hidãyah(cid:9) BOOK VIII: DIVORCE
the sweetness of another."35 It has been reported through different chan-
nels. No one disagrees about it (the condition of intercourse) except Sa'id
ibn al-Musayyib (God be pleased with him). His view is not taken into
account, so much so that that if a qãdi renders judgement on the basis of
this view, his judgement will not be implemented. The condition is that
of penetration and not ejaculation, because ejaculation is completion and
perfection in the act. Completion becomes an additional condition.
An adolescent minor is like a major for making the woman lawful,
because of the existence of penetration in a valid marriage, which is the
condition imposed by the text. Mãlik (God bless him) opposes us in this
issue,' but the proof (hujjah) against him is what we have elaborated.
Muhammad (God bless him) elaborated the meaning of such a minor
and said that he is "a boy who has not attained puberty, but is capable of
intercourse. If such a boy has intercourse with a woman she is under an
obligation to bathe and he makes her lawful for the first husband." The
meaning of this statement is that he has an erection and derives pleasure.
Bathing, however, is obligatory for her (even though he cannot ejaculate)
due to the meeting of the genitals,37 which is the cause for her orgasm.
There is, thus, a need for making bathing obligatory for her (by way
of precaution), but for such a minor there is no bathing, however, he
is ordered to bathe so that he acquires the habit of doing so.
He said: Sexual intercourse of a master with the slave woman does
not make her lawful (for the first husband), because the purpose is inter-
course by the husband. If he marries her on the condition of making her
lawful, then, the marriage is disapproved (makrüh). This is due to the
words of the Prophet (God bless him and grant him peace), "The curse
of Allah upon one who makes lawful and the one for whom he makes
lawful ."8 This is the construed meaning of the tradition (that is, disap
proval) Consequently, if he divorces her after having had intercourse
with her she becomes lawful for the first, due to intercourse in a valid
351t is reported by all the six sound compilations from 'A'ishah (God be pleased with
her). Al-Zayla'i, vol. 3, 237.
'Because ejaculation is a condition in his view and that is not found in case of such
a minor.
37The outward cause has been assigned the rule of the consequences.
381t is recorded through many channels and one such channel is recorded by al-
Tirmidhi, al-Nasã'i and others. A1-Zayla'i, vol. 3, 238.
39The apparent meaning may be construed as prohibition, however, the tradition has
called the person "one who makes lawful' therefore, disapproval is the real meaning.

--- Page 737 ---

BOOK VIII: DIVORCE(cid:9) Al-Hidãyah(cid:9) 21
marriage, because marriage is not annulled as a result of the condition. It
is reported from Abü Yüsuf (God bless him) that the condition renders
the contract irregular (fasid) insofar as there is an element of limited time
in it, and the marriage does not make the woman lawful for the first hus-
band due to the irregularity. It is reported from Muhammad (God bless
him) that the marriage is valid, on the basis of our explanation, but the
woman does not become lawful for the first, because he attempts to has-
ten what has been considered delayed by the law (shar'), thus, he will be
penalised by denying him the objective as in the case of murder of the
ancestor (inheritee).
If he divorces a freewoman with one repudiation or two repudia-
tions, and she completes her waiting period and then marries another
man, but then returns to the first husband (after divorce from the sec-
ond), she comes back with (the first husband possessing) three divorces.
The second husband demolishes the repudiations that are less than three
just as he demolishes three repudiations. This is the position according
to Abü Hanifah and AbU Yüsuf (God bless them), while Muhammad
(God bless him) said that he does not demolish what is less than three,
because the contract is the ultimate solution for the prohibition on the
basis of the text, therefore, the (second) husband removes it, but there
can be no removal prior to the proof of the prohibition (through three
repudiations). The two jurists rely on the words of the Prophet (God bless
him and grant him peace), "The curse of AJläh upon one who makes
"40
lawful and the one for whom he makes lawful, in which the second
husband has been called one who makes lawful, and he establishes law-
fulness (completely).
If he divorces her thrice and she then says, "I completed my wait-
ing period, married again, he had intercourse with me, divorced me and
thereafter I completed my waiting period' and the duration is sufficient
for all this, then it is permitted to the first husband to consider her truth-
ful when he believes that she is generally truthful. The reason is that it is
a transaction or is a religious matter with which lawfulness is associated,
and in both the word of a single person is acceptable. Further, the report
of the woman is not suspicious as the duration is enough. They disagreed
about the minimum period of such a duration. We shall elaborate it in
the Chapter on the Waiting Period.
See above.
40

--- Page 738 ---

22(cid:9) Al-Hidãyah(cid:9) BOOK VIII: DIVORCE

--- Page 739 ---

Chapter 68
ha' (Vow of Continence)
When a man says to his wife, "By Allah, I will not come near you," or
he says, "By Allah, I will not come near you for four months," then he is
one who has made a vow of continence, due to the words of the Exalted,
"For those who take an oath for abstention from their wives, a waiting
for four months is ordained; if then they return, Allah is Oft-forgiving,
Most Merciful. But if their intention is firm for divorce, Allah heareth and
knoweth all things."
If he has intercourse with her within four months, he has broken
his oath and become liable for expiation, because expiation is the conse-
quential liability for breaking an oath. The vow of continence, however,
will be extinguished, as an oath is removed when it is broken.
If he does not come near her until four months are over she is
divorced irrevocably from him through a single repudiation.' Al-Shãfi'i
(God bless him) said that she is separated irrevocably by the pronounce-
ment of the qadi. The reason is that the husband is denying her her right
of cohabitation, therefore, the qãdl acts in his place in pronouncing it
as in the case of the person with an amputated organ or the eunuch.
Our argument is that he committed injustice against her by denying her
her right, therefore, the shari'ah deemed it permissible by annulling the
blessing of nikdh with the passage of this period. This is reported' from
'Uthmãn, 'All, the three Abd Allãhs, and Zayd ibn al-Thãbit, may AJlãh
'Qur'an 2 226, 227.
A1-'Ayni uses the words "through a single irrevocable repudiation." A1-'Ayii, vol. 5,
2
489. He says this, perhaps, to emphasise that he can marry her again without an inter-
vening marriage.
31t is recorded by 'Abd al-Razzaq. Al-Zayla'i, vol. 3, 241.
23

--- Page 740 ---

24(cid:9) Al-Hidayah(cid:9) BOOK VIII: DIVORCE
be pleased with them all, and their example is sufficient. Further, this
amounted to (immediate) divorce in the period of Jahiliyyah and the
shari'ah ordained the delaying of its occurrence up to the end of the
period.4
If he makes a vow to abstain for a period of four months the oath
lapses,' because it was limited in time by this period. If he makes a vow
for all times, the oath subsists. The reason is that it is independent of
time, and no annulment is found.' The repudiation (resulting from such
an oath) does not repeat itself (every four months), unless there is prior
marriage, because there was no denial of her right after the occurrence
of irrevocable separation. But if her goes back on it and marries her,
the ha is revived. If he does not have intercourse with her (after mar-
riage), another repudiation will occur with the passage of four months.
The reason is that the oath subsists for it is absolute in nature, and her
right is established again with marriage and injustice occurs. The com-
mencement of such ha will be reckoned from the time of marriage. If
he marries her a third time, the ila comes back and repudiation occurs
with the passage of another four months if he does not approach her, as
we have explained. If he marries her again after another husband (and
subsequent divorce) no repudiation will occur due to this (the earlier)
ila, because it stands restricted by the divorce of such ownership. This is a
sub-issue of the disputed topic of "completion" that has preceded earlier.7
The oath, however, subsists due to its absolute form and the absence of
annulment. If he has intercourse with her, he violates his oath due to the
existence of the violating factor.
If he makes an oath for a period that is less than four months, he has
not made the vow of continence. This is due to the words of Ibn 'Abbãs
(God be pleased with him) that there is no ha in what is less than four
months.' Further, refusing to go near her for a period is without a legal
obstacle (like a vow). Divorce is not established with such abstention.
4"For those who take an oath for abstention from their wives, a waiting for four
months is ordained; if then they return, Allah is Oft-forgiving, Most Merciful." Qur'an
2:226.
50n the passage of four months.
6That is, a cause for the annulment of the oath, which is intercourse.
'See Volume I of this translation, last para on p. 608 and note 4.
'It is recorded by Ibn Abi Shaybah. A1-Zayla'i, vol. 3, 243.

--- Page 741 ---

BOOK VIII: DIVORCE(cid:9) A1-Hidayah(cid:9) 25
If he says, "By Allah, I will not approach you for two months and
then for two months after these:' then he has made the vow of conti-
nence. The reason is that the two periods are joined by a word used for
conjunction and it becomes an addition. If he waits for a day and then
says: "By Allah, I will not approach you for two months after the first two
months:' then he has not made the vow of continence, because the sec-
ond statement amounts to a report about the first, therefore, it blocks the
first oath for about two months. After the second two months it amounts
to four months less one day for which he waited, thus, the preventing
period of four months is not complete.
If he says, "By Allah, I will not approach you for a year, except one
day" he has not made the vow of continence. Zufar (God bless him) dis-
agrees for he construes the exemption to apply at the end of the period on
the analogy of ijärah (hire) thus considering the period to be complete.
In our view, the person making the vow of continence is one who is not
able to approach his wife for four months without violating his oath that
is binding on him. In this case he is able to do so. The reason is that the
exempted day is unspecified as distinguished from hire, because in hire
construing it to mean the end of the period is necessary for its validity.
Hire is not validly constituted with unspecified days—an oath is unlike
hire.
If he cohabits with her on a day when four months or more still
remain, he becomes one who has made the vow of continence, because
of the extinction of the exception.
If he says, while he is at Basrah, "By Allah I will not enter Kufah' and
at this time his wife is at Kufah, he has not made the vow of continence.
The reason is that it is possible for him to approach her without being
bound by his oath by her coming out from Kufah.
He (al-QudUri) said: If he makes an oath (that if he approaches her he
will be liable) for hajj, fasting, emancipation of a slave or divorce, then he
has made a vow of continence. This is due to the occurrence of prevention
on account of an oath, which consists of the mentioning of the condition
and its consequences. These consequence are preventive insofar as there
is great hardship in them. The form of the oath for emancipation is that
he associate his approaching her with the emancipation of his slave. In
this there is disagreement on the part of AbU Yüsuf (God bless him). He
says that it is possible for him to sell (the slave) and then approach her
after which he will not be liable for anything. The two jurists say that

--- Page 742 ---

26(cid:9) Al-Hidäyah(cid:9) BOOK VIII: DIVORCE
sale (of the slave) is probable (he may or may not sell), therefore, this
probability does not eliminate the prohibition of approaching his wife.
The oath with respect to divorce is that he suspend her divorce upon his
approaching her or the divorce of her companion wife. All these things
prevent him from cohabiting with her.
If he makes a vow of continence with respect to his wife whom he
has repudiated with a possibility of retraction, his vow is valid, but if he
makes it with respect to his wife whom he has divorced irrevocably, it
is not valid. The reason is that the relationship of marriage exists in the
case of the first, but not in the case of the second, and the subject-matter
of 'ha', on the basis of the text, are those who are still our wives. If the
waiting period ends prior to the termination of the period of 'ha', the
oath is extinguished due to the extinction of the subject-matter.
If he says to a woman who is a stranger, "By Allah, I will not cohabit
with you' or he says, "You are like my mother's back for me," and there-
after he marries her, he has not made the vow of continence or that
of injurious assimilation (zihar). The reason is that the statement in its
expressed form is void due to the absence of the subject-matter and can-
not be converted into a valid statement later. If, however, he cohabits with
her he commits a sin, due to the occurrence of the violation of the vow,
because the oath is found as far as violation is concerned.9
The period of 'ha' for a slave woman is two months. The reason is
that this oath amounts to a period for irrevocable divorce, therefore, it is
converted to half like the duration of the waiting period.
If the person making the oath is ill and does not have the ability to
undertake intercourse, or she is ill or suffers from ratq1° or is a minor
with whom intercourse is not undertaken or there is between them a
distance and she cannot be reached within the period of the vow, then,
in all these cases he may say in words that he has had recourse to her
during the period of 'ha'. If he says this the vow is terminated. A1-Shãfi'i
said that there is no recourse except through intercourse. This is also the
view upheld by al-Tahawi, because if it amounted to recourse it would
amount to a violation. Our reasoning is that he (merely) tormented her
by mentioning denial, therefore, is now appeasing her with an expression
9This is true with respect to the statement about not cohabiting, but not with respect
to the injurious assimilation. Al-'Ayni, vol. 5, 498.
"Birth defect in which the vulva is blocked, or the sides of the vulva are joined
together.

--- Page 743 ---

BOOK VIII: DIVORCE(cid:9) Al-Hidãyah(cid:9) 27
of promise. If he has removed the basis of injustice, he is not to be repri-
manded through a divorce. If he recovers the ability to have intercourse
during this period, the verbal recourse is annulled and his recourse now
is through intercourse. The reason is that he is now able to perform the
primary duty prior to the performance of the substitutory duty.
If he says to his wife, "You are henceforth prohibited for me' he will
be asked about his resolve. If he says that he was lying, it will be pre-
sumed to be so. The reason is that he formed an intention according to
the actual use of his words. It is also said that for purposes of adjudica-
tion, his statement about his resolve will not be accepted, because it is
an oath that is apparent. If he says that he intended divorce, then, it will
be presumed to be a single irrevocable repudiation, unless he intended
three. We have already discussed this under metaphorical statements. If
he says that he intended injurious assimilation (zihãr) , it will be deemed
injurious assimilation. This is so according to Abü Hanifah and Abü
Yüsuf (God bless them). Muhammad (God bless him) said that it does
not amount to zihãr due to the lack of resemblance with prohibition,
which is an essential ingredient for it. The two jurists said that he has
used prohibition in unqualified terms, and zihãr is one type of prohibi-
tion. Here the unqualified is to be construed in terms of the qualified. If
he says that he intended prohibition thereby or did not intend anything
in particular, then, it is an oath by virtue of which he will be deemed to
have made a vow of continence. The reason is that the basis in the prohi-
bition of something lawful is an oath in our view. We shall mention this
in the topic of vows/oaths, God willing. Among the Masha'ikh are those
who interpret the word prohibition to mean divorce without any partic-
ular resolve, and this according to the rule of custom. Allah knows what
is correct.

--- Page 744 ---

28(cid:9) Al-Hidayah(cid:9) Book VIII: DIVORCE

--- Page 745 ---

Chapter 69
Khul' (Redemption)
69.1 KHUL' (REDEMPTION)
When the spouses face constant discord and are apprehensive that they
will not be able to maintain the limits imposed by Allah (hudüd Allah),
then there is no harm if she seeks to redeem herself from him through
wealth on account of which he will let her go. This is based upon the
words of the Exalted, "If ye (judges) do indeed fear that they would
be unable to keep the limits ordained by Allah, there is no blame on
either of them if she give something for her freedom. These are the lim-
its ordained by Allah, so do not transgress them. If any do transgress the
limits ordained by Allah, such persons wrong (themselves as well as oth-
ers)."'
If they do so, an irrevocable divorce occurs through khul' and pay-
ment of wealth becomes binding on her. This is due to the words of the
Prophet (God bless him and grant him peace), "Khul' is an irrevocable
repudiation."' Further, khul' implies divorce that occurs with an indi-
rect expression, and divorce through an indirect expression is irrevocable
(but it is dependent upon resolve (niyyah)).3 The mentioning of wealth,
however, does away with the need for niyyah here. In addition to this, a
woman will not deliver wealth until her own being is delivered to her, and
this occurs through irrevocability.
'Qur'an 2: 229
211 is recorded by al-Dar'qutni in his al-Sunan and thereafter by al-Bayhaqi. Al-
Zayla'i, vol. 3, 243.
3See volume I of this translation on page 588.
29

--- Page 746 ---

30(cid:9) Al-Hidyah(cid:9) BOOK VIII: DIVORCE
If hostility occurs on his part, it is considered disapproved that he
take compensation from her (for her release), due to the words of the
Exalted, "But if ye decide to take one wife in place of another, even if ye
had given the latter a whole treasure for dower, take not the least bit of it
back."4 The reason is that he has already distressed her by taking another
wife, thus, he should not add to her distress by taking wealth.
If the discord is because of her, we consider it disapproved that he
take from her more than he had given her. In the narration of al-Jami'
al-Saghir it is said that it is acceptable to charge excess too due to the
unqualified meaning of the verse that we have recited in the beginning.'
Another reason is provided by the words of the Prophet (God bless him
and grant him peace) in the case of the wife of Thãbit ibn Qays ibn
Shimãs, "As for excess, no!"' In this case, discord was on her part.
If he takes back in excess (of what he gave her) it is valid for purposes
of adjudication. Likewise if he takes more when the discord is due to him.
The reason is that the legally implied meanings in the verse are two: legal
permissibility and permissibility for the hereafter. Acting upon permissi-
bility for purposes of the hereafter has been given up due to an obstacle7
and that leaves the option to act upon what remains.
If he divorces her in return for compensation by way of wealth and
she accepts, divorce takes place and she becomes liable for payment of
wealth. The reason is that the husband is independent in pronouncing
immediate or contingent divorce, and here he has made it contingent
upon her acceptance. The woman, on the other hand, has the legal capac-
ity to undertake financial transactions due to her authority over her own
affairs. The ownership through nikãh is something that can be the object
of compensation, even though it is not wealth as in the case of qisãs.
Divorce in such a case will be irrevocable due to what we have elabo-
rated, because it is a transaction that entails the exchange of wealth for
self. The husband came to own one of these counter-values, thus, she
comes to own the other, and that is her self in confirmation of equality.
If the counter-value becomes unlawful, like giving a Muslim in lieu of
khul' something like khamr (wine), swine or carrion, then, the husband
4Qur'5n 4 20
'That is, "If she give something for her freedom."
'It is recorded by Abü Dãwüd in his marasil. A1-Zayla'i, vol. 3,244.
'The tradition that says, "As for excess, no!"

--- Page 747 ---

BOOK VIII: DIVORCE(cid:9) Al-Hidyah(cid:9) 31
gets nothing, but the separation is irrevocable. If, however, the counter-
value is invalid in the case of divorce, the divorce becomes revocable.
Divorce in both cases is contingent upon her acceptance, but there is a
distinction between their legal rules. The reason is that when the counter-
value becomes invalid, the operating factor in the first case is the word
khul', which is an indirect expression (for divorce). In the second case it
is explicit and its consequence is a revocable divorce. Nothing is due to
the husband from her, because she did not mention marketable wealth
so that she may be said to have deceived her husband. Further, there is
no basis for imposing a liability for delivering the named thing nor for
imposing a duty of giving something else due to the lack of obligation.
This is different from the case where he participated in khul' in return for
vinegar itself, but it turns out to be khamr, which is also a type of wealth,
thus, she will be deceiving him. This is further distinguished from the case
where he enters into an agreement of mukãtabah or emancipates a slave
in return for khamr, in which case the value of the slave will become due.
The reason is that the property of the owner in this case is marketable
and he has not agreed to forgo ownership gratis.
As for ownership of (rights to) sex they are not marketable at the
time of termination of the relationship, as we will mention. This is dis-
tinguished from nikãh, because rights to sex at the time of entry into
the contract are marketable. The legal basis (fiqh) in this is that it is
something honourable and it is not lawful to own it without paying a
counter-value in recognition of its honour. As for the extinction of the
rights, it is in itself something honourable, therefore, there is no need to
create a liability for wealth.
He said: What is valid as payment of dower is valid as a counter-
value for khul'. The reason is that if something can be a counter-value
for a marketable thing it can preferably be a counter-value for something
that is not marketable.
If she were to say to him, "Grant me khul' in exchange for what is
in my hand" and he agrees to give her khul', but there is nothing in her
hand, then, he has no claim against her. The reason is that she did not
deceive him by saying that she had some thing of value in her hand. If
she were to say, "Grant me khul' for the valuable thing I have in my
hand" and he did so, but there was nothing in her hand, she is under a
liability to return her dower to him. The reason is that when she named
something of value, the husband was not ready to undo the bond except

--- Page 748 ---

32(cid:9) Al-Hideyah(cid:9) Book VIII: DIVORCE
in exchange for something. There is no reason for imposing liability for
the value of what was named due to uncertainty nor the value of sexual
rights, I mean thereby reasonable dower (mahr al-mithi), because it is
something that is not marketable at the time of termination of the con-
tract. Thus, liability for what the husband had given is imposed in order
to avoid harm to his interests. If she were to say, "Grant me khul' for the
dirhams or for the number of dirhams in my hand' but there is nothing
in her hand, she is liable for three dirhams. The reason is that she men-
tioned a plural and the minimum number assigned to the plural is three.
The word mm (of) is for establishing a link and not division, because the
statement would lose meaning without it.
If she is granted khul' for her runaway slave and she stipulates that
she is absolved of all liability (for capture), she will not be absolved of
such liability and is liable for delivering the slave if that is possible or
for the payment of his value if she is unable to deliver him. The reason is
that this is a commutative contract and, therefore, requires the soundness
of the counter-value. The stipulation of no liability on her part is the
stipulation of a vitiated (rsid) condition, which is annulled. The khul',
however, is not annulled due to vitiated conditions. The same rules apply
to nikãh.
69.2 DIVORCE IN EXCHANGE FOR WEALTH
If she says, "Divorce me thrice for a thousand (bi-alf)' and he divorces
her with a single repudiation, then she is liable for one-third of one thou-
sand. The reason is that when she demanded three for one thousand, she
demanded each one of them for one-third of a thousand. The reason is
that the letter bã' accompanies counter-values and the counter-value is
divided over what it is paid for. The divorce, however, is irrevocable due
to the obligation of paying wealth for it.
If she says, "Divorce me thrice on one thousand ('aM alf)' and he
makes one repudiation, then she is under no obligation to pay anything
according to Abü Hanifah (God bless him), but he possesses the right of
retraction. The two jurists said that it is a single irrevocable repudiation
for one-third of a thousand. The reasoning (of the two jurists) is that the
word 'ala has the same impact as bã' with respect to commutative con-
tracts. Thus, the saying, "Transport this wheat for a dirham (bi-dirham)
or on one dirham ('ala dirham)," are the same. Abü Hanifah's reasoning

--- Page 749 ---

BOOK VIII: DIVORCE(cid:9) A1-Hidayah(cid:9) 33
is that the word 'ala is for stipulation. Allah, the Exalted, has said, "When
believing women come to thee to take the oath of fealty to thee, that they
will not associate in worship any other thing whatever with Allah."' Fur-
ther, when a person says to his wife, "You are divorced on ('ala) entering
the house' it is a condition. The reason is that it is originally for creating
an obligation, but is used as a loan-word for a condition as it accompa-
nies a consequence. If it is used for a condition, then conditions are not
split up and distributed over the consequences of a condition. This is dis-
tinguished from the letter ba', because bã' is used for a counter-value as
has preceded. Accordingly, when payment of wealth is not obligatory, it
amounts to a declaration through which divorce takes place and he pos-
sesses the right of recourse.
If the husband were to say, "Divorce yourself for one thousand or
on one thousand:' and she divorces herself with a single repudiation,
no divorce takes place. The reason is that the husband did not agree to
irrevocability, unless the entire one thousand is delivered to him. This is
distinguished from her statement, "Divorce me thrice for one thousand,"
as she was agreeing to irrevocability for a thousand, therefore, agreeing
for a part of it is prior.
If he were to say, "You are divorced on ('ala) one thousand' and she
accepts, she stands divorced. She is now under an obligation to pay one
thousand. It amounts to the same thing as saying, "You are divorced for
(bi) one thousand?' Acceptance is necessary in both cases, because the
meaning of his words, "For a thousand" is "For a counter-value of one
thousand that you have to pay me." The meaning of his statement, "On
one thousand' is "On the condition of one thousand that you have to
pay me." A counter-value does not become due without acceptance, and
something suspended upon a condition cannot be done away with prior
to its coming into existence. The divorce, however, is irrevocable, on the
basis of what we have said.
If a person says to his wife, "You are divorced and one thousand is
due from you' and she accepts, and he says to his slave, "You are free
and one thousand is due from you' and the slave accepts, then the slave
stands emancipated and the woman divorced, but they do not owe any-
thing according to AbU Hanifah (God bless him). If they do not accept
then neither divorce nor emancipation has taken place. The two jurists
8Qur'an 6o: 12

--- Page 750 ---

34(cid:9) Al-Hidayah(cid:9) BOOK VIII: DIVORCE
argue that this statement is used in the sense of compensation. The state-
ment, "Transport these goods and for you is a dirham at the destination,"
amounts to saying bi-dirham. He argues that the later part is a complete
sentence and is not to be linked by implication to what precedes it. The
reason is that the basis in these is independence and not implication,
because divorce and emancipation are (normally) devoid of wealth as dis-
tinguished from sale and hire as such contracts cannot take place without
it.
If a person says (to his wife), "You are divorced on one thousand
on the condition that I have an option for three days:' or he says, "You
have an option for three days:' and the woman accepts, then the option
is void where it belongs to the husband, but it is valid where it belongs
to the wife. If she rejects the option within the three days, the divorce
is annulled, but if she does not reject it she stands divorced and is liable
for paying one thousand. This is the case according to Abü Tlanifah (God
bless him). The two jurists said that the option is void in both cases, but
the divorce occurs and she is liable for one thousand dirhams. The reason
is that the option is for rescission after conclusion (of the agreement)
and not for preventing conclusion. These two transactions do not admit
of rescission from either party, because from his side it amounts to an
oath and from her side a condition. According to AbU Hanifah (God bless
him), khul' from her perspective is of the status of a sale so much so
that her retraction is valid, but such retraction does not exist beyond the
session of the contract, thus, the stipulation of an option is valid in it. As
for his perspective, it is an oath such that it is not valid to retract from
it and it abides till after the session, and there is no option in oaths. The
perspective of the slave in the case of emancipation is like her perspective
in case of divorce.
If a person says to his wife that he divorced her the day before on
one thousand dirhams, but she did not accept, and in response to which
she says that she did accept, then the acceptable statement is that of
the husband. Where a person says to another, "I sold this slave to you
yesterday for one thousand dirhams, but you did not accept' and he
says in response that he did accept, then the acceptable statement is
that of the buyer. The underlying reasoning for the distinction is that
divorce in lieu of wealth is an oath from the perspective of the husband,
therefore, acknowledging it does not amount to acknowledgement with
a condition due to its validity without it, however, in the case of sale

--- Page 751 ---

BOOK VIII: DIVORCE(cid:9) Al-Hidayah(cid:9) 35
it is not concluded without acceptance and acknowledging it amounts
to acknowledging something that is not concluded without it. Thus, his
denial of the acceptance will amount to withdrawing from the sale.
69.3 MUBARA'AH (DIVORCE WITH No LIABILITIES)
He said: Mubära'ah is like khul'. Both extinguish each of the rights that
the spouses have over each other with respect to nikàh, according to
AbU Hanifah (God bless him). Muhammad (God bless him) said: No
right is extinguished in either except that named. AbU Yüsuf (God bless
him) sides with him in the case of khul', but he sides with Abü Hanifah
(God bless him) in the case of mubãra'ah. Muhammad (God bless him)
argues that this is a commutative agreement and in commutative agree-
ments only the specified conditions are taken into account and nothing
else. AbU Yüsuf (God bless him) argues that mubãra'ah is a derivative
of barã'a/i (to absolve of all liability), therefore, this is legally required
for both sides. Further, it is unqualified in meaning and we have quali-
fied it through the rights pertaining to nikãh due to the implication of
the obligation. As for khul' its legal requirement is the removing of the
relationship, and this is achieved through the annulment of the contract
of nikãh, but there is no necessity to cut off other legal rules as well. Abü
Hanifah (God bless him) argues that khul' is constructed upon the mean-
ing of doffing or taking off, like taking off shoes or giving up work, and
this meaning is absolute like mubãra'ah, thus, the absolute meaning has
to be given operation with respect to nikãh, its legal effects, and rights.
He said: If a person obtains khul' for his daughter with her wealth
when she is a minor, it is not valid for her. The reason is that she cannot
form a consent for this, because rights of access for sex are not marketable
at the time of moving out of the contract, while the counter-value is mar-
ketable. This is distinguished from nikãh, because rights of access for sex
are marketable at the time of entry into the contract. It is for this reason
that khul' in the case of a woman suffering from terminal illness are oper-
ative up to a third of her entire wealth and the contract of marriage of a
man in terminal illness can operate through reasonable dower out of the
entire wealth. As such a khul' is not valid, the liability for the payment of
dower is not extinguished, and the husband is not entitled to her wealth.
Thereafter, in one narration it is said that divorce takes place, while in
another narration it is said that it does not take place. The first narration

--- Page 752 ---

36(cid:9) Al-Hidãyah(cid:9) BOOK VIII: DIVORCE
is more authentic, because it amounts to association of the divorce with
the condition of acceptance by her, therefore, it will be considered like all
other contingent stipulations.
If this person (the father) obtains khul' for her by saying that he
stands surety for payment, then the khul' takes effect and the father is
liable for the thousand (dirhams). The reason is that stipulating payment
of the counter-value by a stranger is valid, therefore, for the father it has
prior validity. Her right to dower, however, is not extinguished, because
that does not fall under the authority (wilãyah) of the father.
If he stipulates that the thousand will be paid by her, the contract is
suspended subject to her ratification if she is one who can legally accept.
If she does accept, divorce takes place, due to the stipulation of wealth
but there is no liability for payment, because she is not one on whom
a financial burden can be imposed. If the father accepts on her behalf,
then there are two narrations in this. Likewise if he obtains khul' for her
in lieu of her dower, but the father does not stand surety for payment
of the dower. It will be subject to her acceptance; if she accepts divorce
takes place, but dower is not extinguished. If the father accepts on her
behalf, then there are two narrations. If the father stands surety for the
dower, when it is one thousand dirhams, she stands divorced, due to his
acceptance, which is a condition. On the basis of istihsãn he is made liable
for five hundred, but on the basis of analogy he is liable for the entire one
thousand. The rule for a woman who is a major when she obtains khul'
prior to consummation in lieu of one thousand where her dower is also
one thousand, is liable for an additional five hundred, on the basis of
analogy. On the basis of istihsãn, however, she is not liable for anything,
because it is usually intended in such a case that she give what she is
bound to pay.

--- Page 753 ---

Chapter
70
Zihãr (Injurious Assimilation)
If a man says to his wife, "You are for me like the back of my mother:'
then she stands prohibited for him. It is not permitted to him to have
intercourse with her or to fondle her or to kiss her, unless he offers expi-
ation for his oath of zihãr. This is based upon the words of the Exalted,
"But those who pronounce the oath of zihãr to abstain from their wives,
then wish to go back on the words they uttered,—(it is ordained that
such a one) should free a slave before they touch each other: thus are ye
admonished to perform: and Allah is well-acquainted with (all) that ye
do."'
The pronouncement of zihãr amounted to divorce in the days of the
Jahiliyyah. The shar' (law) affirmed its basis, but transferred its legal
effects to those of temporary prohibition to be done away with expia-
tion (kaffarah) without eliminating the contract of nikãh. The reason is
that zihãr is an offence due to the use of false and iniquitous words,2
therefore, it is suitable to impose the penalty of her prohibition that is
removed through expiation. Thereafter, intercourse that is prohibited is
prohibited along with its preliminaries so that he does not succumb to it
as in the case of ihrãm.3 This is distinguished from the cases of menstru-
ation and fasting as they occur frequently, thus, if the preliminaries are
'Qur'an 58: 3
The Qur'an says: "If any men among you pronounce zihãr for their wives, they
2
cannot be their mothers: none can be their mothers except those who gave them birth.
And in fact they use words (both) iniquitous and false: but truly Allah is All-Pardoning,
All-Forgiving." Qur'an 58 : 2
That is, ihrãm for hajj prohibits intercourse and its preliminaries.
3
37

--- Page 754 ---

38(cid:9) Al-Hidayah(cid:9) BOOK VIII: DIVORCE
prohibited it will lead to hardship. The cases of zihãr and ihrãm are not
like this.4
If he has intercourse with her prior to expiation, he is to seek the
forgiveness of Allah, but there is no (additional) liability for him except
the first expiation. He is not to repeat his act until he offers expiation.
This is based upon the words of the Prophet (God bless him and grant
him peace) in the case of a person who committed intercourse prior to the
offering of expiation, "Seek the forgiveness of Allah and do not commit it
again until you offer expiation."' Had there been some other liability he
would have indicated that.
He said: This word (zihãr) cannot mean anything other than zihar,
because it is explicit in its use for such meaning (does not have a figurative
sense). If he intends a divorce thereby it is not valid. The reason is that
such an implication has been abrogated, thus, he cannot bring it about
through his intention.'
If he says, "You are for me like the body of my mother," or names
her thighs or her vagina, then he is a muzähir. The reason is that zihãr is
nothing more than drawing a similarity between a permitted woman and
a prohibited woman. Such a meaning, however, stands realised in a limb
that is not to be looked at (in the case of a prohibited woman).
The same rule applies if he draws such a similarity with a woman
who is prohibited forever with respect to glancing at her, like his sister,
aunt or foster mother. The reason is that these women with respect to
perpetual prohibition are like the real mother.
Likewise, if he says, "Your head is for me like the back of my mother"
or he names her vagina, her face, legs, half her body, one-third of the
body, or her body. The reason is that he has used an expression for
her about her entire body, and the rule is established for an undivided
part and then extends to the entire body, as we elaborated in the case of
divorce.
If he says, "You are for me like my mother," or "You are like my
mother," recourse is to be had to his intention, so as to unveil the rule.
'That is, they do not occur frequently.
1t is recorded by Abü Dawud, al-Tirmidhi, Ibn Majah and al-Nasa'i in their Sunan.
5
Al-Zayla'i, vol. 3, 246.
The earlier implication of the period of Jahiliyyah has been abrogated by the
6
shari'ah and the subject cannot alter such an abrogation through his intention. al-'Ayni,
vol. 5, 535.

--- Page 755 ---

BOOK VIII: DIVORCE(cid:9) Al-Hidãyah(cid:9) 39
If he says, "I merely intended respect," then it is as he says. The reason
is that according respect through similarities is widespread in speech. If
he says, "I intended zihãr," it is to be treated as zih4r. The reason is that
the similarity drawn is with the entire person, which includes a similar-
ity of limbs, but it is not explicit, therefore, the need of recourse to his
intention arises. If he says, "I intended divorce," then it is an irrevoca-
ble repudiation. The basis is that it is a similarity drawn with the mother
with respect to prohibition. It is as if he had said, "You are prohibited for
me," and had intended divorce. If he did not form any intention, then
it amounts to nothing, according to Abü Hanifah and Abü Yüsuf (God
bless them) due to the probability of being construed as the according
of respect. Muhammad (God bless him) said that it amounts to zthãr. He
maintains that drawing a similarity with her in the case of a limb amounts
to zihãr, therefore, drawing a similarity with her whole person is to be
accorded greater precedence. If he had meant prohibition thereby and
nothing more, then, according to AbU YUsuf (God bless him) it amounts
to ha' so that what is established is the lowest category of prohibition.
According to Muhammad (God bless him), it is zihãr, because the char-
acter kaf of similarity is specific to zihãr.
If he says, "You are prohibited for me like my mother:' and intended
zihar or divorce thereby, then it will be as he intended. The reason is that
it probably implies both forms. It implies zihãr due to the existence of
similarity, and divorce due to the existence of prohibition where the sim-
ilarity is for emphasis. If he does not have an intention, then, according
to the view of Abü Yüsuf (God bless him), it is ha', but according to the
view of Muhammad (God bless him), it is zihãr. The two probabilities we
have explained.
If he says, "You are prohibited for me like the back of my mother'
and he intends thereby divorce or ha', it will not be anything else but
zihãr, according to AbU Hanifah (God bless him). The two jurists said
that it will be as he intended. The reason is that prohibition implies all
this, as we have explained, however, according to Muhammad (God bless
him) if he intends divorce the pronouncement does not amount to zihãr.
According to AbU Yüsuf (God bless him) it amounts to all these forms,
and this has been explained at its occasion. According to AbU Hanifah
(God bless him), it is explicit for purposes of zihãr and does not imply
another form. Further, it is muhkam (unalterable), therefore, the prohi-
bition is associated with it.

--- Page 756 ---

40(cid:9) Al-Hidãyah(cid:9) BOOK VIII: DIVORCE
Zihãr does not apply to cases other than that of the wife so that if
he makes the pronouncement for his slave woman he does not become
a muzähir. This is based upon the words of the Exalted, "If any men
among you pronounce zihãr for their wives. . . ."I The reason is that the
permissibility pertaining to the slave woman is secondary' and is not to
be associated with that for the lawfully married wife. Further, the legal
effects of zihãr have been transferred from divorce, and there is no divorce
in the case of owned slaves.
If he marries a woman who has not consented (as yet) and then pro-
nounces zihär with respect to her, but thereafter the woman ratifies the
marriage, the zihãr stands annulled. The reason is that he was truthful
at the time of drawing the similarity between prohibitions, therefore, his
statement was not false. Zihãr is not a right from among his rights so that
it can be suspended, as distinguished from the emancipation of a slave by
a buyer who has bought him from an abductor, because there it is a right
of ownership.
Where a man says to his wives, "You are (all) for me like the back
of my mother:' he becomes a muzãhir with respect to all of them. The
reason is that he attributed zihãr to all of them, just like he would link
divorce with all of them. He is liable for expiation (independently) for
each one of them. The reason is that prohibition is established for each
one of them and expiation is for the termination of the prohibition, thus,
it will multiply with their multiplication, as distinguished from ha' with
respect to all of them, because expiation there is for protecting the sacred-
ness of the name9 and the name mentioned does not increase in number.
70.1 KAFFARAH (ExPIATIoN)
The expiation for zihär is the emancipation of a slave (raqabah). If a
slave is not found then consecutive fasting for two months. If that is not
possible then sixty needy persons are to be fed. This is based on the text
laid down for this purpose, for it requires expiation in this order.
He said: And all this is prior to cohabitation. This is obvious from
the text in the case of emancipation and fasting, but it is the same for
feeding as well, because expiation does away with prohibition, therefore,
7Qur'an 58 : 2
8The main purpose being milk yamin.
9 Qf Allah Almighty.

--- Page 757 ---

BOOK VIII: DIVORCE(cid:9) Al-Hidãyah(cid:9) 41
it is necessary that it precede intercourse so that the intercourse becomes
lawful.
He said: It is deemed sufficient to emancipate a slave who is an Unbe-
liever, Muslim, male, female, minor or major. The reason is that the term
raqabah applies equally to all of them, as it is an expression for the per-
son of an enslaved owned human being from all perspectives. Al-Shãfi'i
(God bless him) opposes us in the case of an unbelieving slave. He main-
tains that expiation is the right of Allah, the Exalted, therefore, it is not
proper to apply it to the enemies of Allah, as is the case with zakãt. We say
that what is stated in the text is the emancipation of a raqabah and that
meaning is realised. The intention (of the person offering expiation) is
the granting of the ability to be obedient. Thereafter, commission of sins
will be construed to arise from the bad choices made by the emancipated
slave.
It is not deemed sufficient to emancipate a slave who is blind or
whose hands or legs have been amputated. The reason is that the lost
limbs are part of the benefits, which are sight, grasping and walking and
this prevents expiation." If, however, the benefit is diminished, it does
not prevent expiation, thus, a slave with one eye or one amputated hand
or leg from the opposite side is acceptable, because what is lost is part of
the benefits but are available in a diminished form. This is distinguished
from the case where a hand and a leg are amputated from the same side
that do no make the benefit of walking available for that is difficult for
such a person. It is permissible to emancipate a deaf slave for expiation,
although analogy dictates that he is not acceptable, which is a narration in
the Nawãdir. The reason is that it is part of the main benefit, but we per-
mitted it on the basis of istihsãn, because the essential benefit still remains
for he may hear when shouted at. If, however, he does not hear at all, hav-
ing been born deaf, and he is dumb, it is not deemed sufficient.
It is not valid to emancipate a slave whose thumbs have both been
amputated, because the power of grasping is due to them and with their
loss an essential benefit is lost.
It is not permitted to emancipate an insane slave, who cannot com-
prehend, as the utility derived from limbs is based upon reason, thus, he
has lost the main benefit. It is valid to emancipate a slave who has fits of
'°The reason obviously is that the slave should not be one who is useless for the
master anyway,and he tries to get rid of him through expiation.

--- Page 758 ---

42(cid:9) Al-Hidayah(cid:9) BOOK VIII: DIVORCE
insanity, but then recovers, because disturbance of the benefits does not
prevent the main benefit.
It is not sufficient to emancipate a mudabbar slave (to be set free on
death of master) nor a slave mother, because they are entitled to free-
dom from one aspect and the attribute of slavery in them is deficient.
Likewise the mukãtab who has made some payments, because his eman-
cipation is based upon payment of a counter-value. It is narrated from
Abü Hanifah (God bless him) that his emancipation is sufficient due to
the existence of slavery in all respects, therefore, rescission of the con-
tract of kitãbah is permitted. This is distinguished from the categories of
slave mothers and mudabbars, because these transactions do not admit of
rescission. If the mukãtab is emancipated when he has not paid anything,
the emancipation is valid, with al-Shãfi'i (God bless him) disagreeing. He
maintains that the mukãtab has become entitled to freedom from the per-
spective of kitãbah, therefore, he resembles the mudabbar. We argue that
the attribute of slavery is present in all respects, as we have explained.
This is based upon the words of the Prophet (God bless him and grant
him peace), "The mukãtab is a slave as long as a single dirham is owed by
him." Further, mukãtabah does not negate the attribute of slavery, it is
merely the removal of interdiction like the authorisation for undertaking
trade, however, it is in lieu of a counter-value and is binding on the mas-
ter. Had it been enough to prevent emancipation, it would be revoked
as a requirement of emancipation, because it admits of revocation. The
earning and children are delivered to him, however, because emancipa-
tion, as far as the slave is concerned, is on the basis of kitãbah or that (in
the alternative) revocation is necessary, but this necessity does not extend
to children and earning.
If he buys his (slave) father or son, intending expiation through the
purchase, it is valid for expiation. Al-Shãfi'i (God bless him) said that
it is not permitted. On the same disagreement is based the violation of
an oath, and the issue will come before you, God willing, in the Book of
Aymãn (Vows/Oaths).
If he emancipates one-half of a jointly owned slave, when he enjoys
financial ease, and guarantees the value of the remaining, it is not per-
mitted according to AbU Hanifah (God bless him), while it is permitted
"It is recorded by Abu Dãwüd in his Sunan. A1-Zay1a'i,vo1.3,247.

--- Page 759 ---

BOOK VIII: DIVORCE(cid:9) A1-Hid4yah(cid:9) 43
according to the two jurists.'2 The reason is that he comes to own the
share of his co-owner through the guarantee, and is like a person who
emancipates a whole slave in lieu of expiation when he owns the slave.
This is distinguished from the case where the emancipator is in financial
straits, because it will become obligatory on the slave to work for the share
of the co-owner and this converts it to emancipation for a counter-value.
According to Abü Hanifah (God bless him) the share of the co-owner
is eliminated from his ownership and then reverts back to him through
damãn (guarantee), and this transaction prevents expiation.
If he emancipates one-half of his slave in lieu of expiation and there-
after emancipates the remaining part for the same reason, it is valid. The
reason is that he emancipated him through two statements and the loss
(in the remaining part) is possible in his own share due to emancipation
for the purpose of expiation, and such a transaction does not act as an
obstacle. It is like a person who lays out a goat for sacrifice and the knife
pierces the goat's eye. This is different from the previous case, because in
that the loss occurred in the share of the co-owner. This is the position
according to the principle upheld by Abü Hanifah (God bless him). As
for the two jurists, emancipation cannot be split into parts, therefore, the
emancipation of one-half is the emancipation of the whole, thus, it is not
emancipation through two statements.
If he emancipates one-half of his slave and thereafter has intercourse
with his wife for whom he pronounced zihar following which he emanci-
pates the other half of the slave, it is not valid according to Abü Hanifah.
The reason is that emancipation can be split into parts in his view, and the
condition of emancipation, on the basis of the text, is that he emancipate
prior to cohabitation; in this case, emancipation of one-half occurred
after cohabitation. According to the two jurists, the emancipation of one-
half is the emancipation of the whole, therefore, the entire emancipation
occurred prior to cohabitation.
If the muzähir does not find a slave for emancipation, then the expi-
ation for him is fasting consecutively for two months without an inter-
vening month of Ramadãn or 'Id al-fitr or the day of sacrifice or the
days of tashriq. As for consecutive months it is based upon the texts.
The month of Ramadãn (cannot be included in these two months) as it
"Emancipation cannot be split into parts in their view, and emancipation of a part
is emancipation of the whole.

--- Page 760 ---

44(cid:9) Al-Hidayah(cid:9) BOOK VIII: DIVORCE
does not qualify as expiation for zihãr insofar as it amounts to annulling
what has been made obligatory. Fasting in the other days (mentioned)
is prohibited, thus, they cannot become a substitute for completing the
obligation.
If he has intercourse with the wife, against whom he pronounced
zihr, during the two months, intentionally during the night and out of
forgetfulness during the day, he is to start fasting all over again accord-
ing to AbU Hanifah and Muhammad (God bless them). Abü Yüsuf (God
bless him) said that he is not to start over again, because the consecu-
tive fasting is not prevented as the fast is not rendered fasid and that is
the condition. He argues that if the precedence of expiation is a condi-
tion for cohabitation then what we uphold is the precedence of part of
it, and in what you hold is the delaying of cohabitation till the whole is
completed. The two jurists argue that the condition for fasting is that it
precede cohabitation, and such fasting should be free of cohabitation as
a necessary requirement of the text. This condition is violated, therefore,
he is to start all over again. If he does not fast for a day with or with-
out an excuse, he is to fast all over again. This is due to the absence of
consecutive fasting when he is able to do so.
If a slave pronounces zihar, the only expiation for him is through
fasting, because he does not own anything, therefore, he is not eligible
for expiation through wealth. If the master were to emancipate a slave
on his behalf, or feed the needy, it is not valid. The reason is that he does
not have the legal capacity for ownership, therefore, passing ownership
to him does not make him an owner.
If the muzãhir is not able to fast, then, he is to feed sixty needy per-
sons, due to the words of the Exalted, "And if any has not (the means), he
should fast for two months consecutively before they touch each other.
But if any is unable to do so, he should feed sixty indigent ones, this, that
ye may show your faith in Allah and His Messenger. Those are limits (set
by) Allah. For those who reject (Him), there is a grievous Chastisement.""
He is to feed each needy person one-half sã' of wheat or one sä' of dates
or barley or give him the value of these. This is based upon the words
of the Prophet (God bless him and grant him peace) in the tradition of
Aws ibn al-Sãmit and Sahl ibn Sakhr, "For each needy person is one-half
Qur'an 58: 4
13

--- Page 761 ---

BOOK VIII: DIVORCE(cid:9) Al-Hidayah(cid:9) 45
sã' of wheat?14 The reason is that the factor to be considered is meeting
the need of the day of each needy person, therefore, it is estimated on
the analogy of sadaqat al-fitr. His statement "Or the value of these" is the
opinion of our school, and we have mentioned it in the Book of Zakãt.
If he gives one maund of wheat and two maunds of dates or bar-
ley, it is valid. The purpose is achieved as the class is common.15 If he
orders another to feed on his behalf for his zihär, and this person does
so, he is rewarded. The reason is that it is the taking of a loan in mean-
ing. The poor man first takes possession on his behalf and thereafter for
himself, therefore, making him the owner and then acquiring ownership
is realised.
If he gives them meals in the afternoon and in the evening, it is valid
whether they have consumed less or more. A1-Shãfi'i (God bless him)
said that he is not to be rewarded except by making them owners in con-
sideration of what is done in the case of zakãt and sadaqat al-fitr. The
reason is that making one an owner is more effective in meeting needs,
therefore, permissibility (of meals) cannot be made a substitute for own-
ership. Our argument is that what is stated in the text is feeding, which is
the real meaning of granting the ability to have meals. The permissibility
of meals carries this meaning just like the making of a person an owner.
In the obligation of zakãt, however, the meaning is of giving, while in
sadaqat al-fitr it is payment, and these two meanings carry the sense of
ownership in reality.
If there is among the persons given a meal an infant who has not
weaned, he is not rewarded. The reason is that he cannot consume a meal.
It is necessary to serve curry (or fatty substance) with barley bread so that
the person fed can eat to his satisfaction. Curry is not stipulated for wheat
bread.
If he feeds a single needy person for sixty days, he is rewarded. If he
grants him the entire food (liability) in one day, he will not be rewarded
except for one day, because the purpose is to drive away the want of the
needy person, and his want is renewed every day. Thus, giving him food
the next day is like giving food to another person. This is the view, with-
out disagreement, in the permissibility of giving meals. As for making a
'4According to al-Zayla'i, the correct name is Salamah ibn Sakhr and the tradition is
gharib, however, there are other traditions that give the same meaning. A1-Zayla'i, vol.
3)247.
The class is common here means that the class is feeding and not clothing.
15

--- Page 762 ---

46(cid:9) Al-Hidayah(cid:9) BOOK VIII: DIVORCE
single needy person an owner in one day through (sixty) instalments, it
is said that he is not rewarded, while it is also said that he is rewarded,
because the need to own is renewed within one day. This is distinguished
from the making of one single payment as the making of a distinction is
obligatory due to the text.
If he cohabits with the wife subject to zihar, while the meal is being
taken, he is not to renew the feeding. The reason is that Allah, the Exalted,
has not laid down that the feeding be prior to cohabitation, except that
he is prohibited from doing so before it. Perhaps, it is possible that he
may acquire the ability to emancipate a slave or fast, and in such a case
they will occur after touching. A prohibition that exists due to an external
reason does not negate legality in itself.
If he gives food on account of two zihãrs by giving sixty needy person
one sã' of wheat each (instead of one-half), he is not to be rewarded
except for just one of the two zih*rs, according to AbU Hanifah and AbU
YUsuf (God bless them). Muhammad (God bless him) said that he is to
be rewarded for both. If he feeds like this on account of breaking his
fast and zihãr, he is to be deemed rewarded for both. Muhammad (God
bless him) argues that what he has given is enough for the satisfaction
of the two obligations, and those to whom he has given are the object
of the grant, therefore, it is rightly given to them. It is as if the causes
are different or a distinction has been made in payment. The two jurists
argue that the intention (in this case) for one of the categories becomes
redundant and it is taken into account in (the absolute sense for) both
categories. Thus, when the intention becomes redundant, but the given
food qualifies for one expiation, because one-half sã' is the minimum
quantity, reduction is prevented and not excess, therefore, it is valid for
one expiation, as if he had made a resolve for this expiation itself. This
is distinguished from the case where he makes a distinction in payment,
because the second payment will be treated as payment to another needy
person.
If a person is under an obligation to make expiation for two zihärs,
and he emancipates two slaves, without specifying an intention for either
one of them, it is valid for both. Likewise if he fasts for four months
or feeds one hundred and twenty needy persons, it is valid. The rea-
son is that there is unity of category, therefore, a specific intention is not
needed. If he emancipates one slave for both or fasts for two months, he
is required to determine for which of the two the expiation is intended.

--- Page 763 ---

BOOK VIII: DIVORCE(cid:9) Al-Hidyah(cid:9) 47
If he does this for intentional homicide and for zihär, it is not valid for
either. Zufar (God bless him) said that he is not to be deemed rewarded in
both cases. Al-Shãfi'i (God bless him) said that it is up to him to allocate
to one in both cases, because all expiations due to the unity of purpose
are a single genus. Zufar's argument is that he emancipated one-half slave
for each zihãr and he does not have the choice to allocate them to one
after he has done it for both, because the matter is out of his hands now.
Our argument is that the intention of ascertainment in case of unity of
genus is not beneficial and is deemed redundant. It is beneficial in case
of different genera, and the difference in genera for purposes of the rules
is expiation here with different causes. The example of the first is where
he fasts for one day by way of qada' (delayed substitute performance) for
two days of Ramadãn, he is to be rewarded for one day. The illustration
of the second is that he is under an obligation to offer qadã' for Ramadan
and nadhr (vow), so he must make a distinction through intention. Allah
knows best.

--- Page 764 ---

48(cid:9) Al-Hidayah(cid:9) BOOK VIII: DIVORCE

--- Page 765 ---

Chapter
71
Li Can (Imprecation)
If a person accuses his wife of having committed zinà, when both
spouses are eligible to give testimony, while the woman is one whose
accuser can be awarded hadd for qadhf, or he denies the paternity of her
child, and she demands the consequences of qadhf to follow, then he
is under a duty to follow the procedure of li'ãn. The basis is that li'ãn,
in our view, are testimonies strengthened through oaths and linked to
cursing, and these are a substitute for the hadd of qadhf in the case of
the husband and a substitute for the hadd of zinã in the case of the wife.
This is based upon the words of the Exalted, "And for those who launch
a charge against their wives, and have (in support) no evidence but their
own,"' the exception being made from the genus (of witnesses). Allah, the
Exalted, has said, "Let one of them testify four times by Allah that he is
of those who speak the truth' which is explicit in the meaning of testi-
mony and oath. Accordingly, we say that the essential ingredient (rukn)
is testimony supported by oath. Thereafter, the rukn is associated in his
case with a curse if he is untruthful, and this is a substitute for the hadd of
qadhf and then it is linked with wrath in her case and this is a substitute
for the hadd of zinä.
When this is established, we say: It is necessary that both be eligible
for rendering testimony, because the rukn is testimony. It is also essential
that she be one whose false accuser is liable for the hadd, because it acts
as a substitute for the hadd of qadhf in his case, therefore, she must be
a muhsan. This becomes obligatory by the denial of paternity. The rea-
son is that as soon as he denies paternity he has apparently committed
qadhf. The possibility that the child could be of some other man through
Qur'ãn 24: 6
1
49

--- Page 766 ---

50(cid:9) Al-Hidayah(cid:9) BOOK VIII: DIVORCE
intercourse based upon doubt is not to be taken into account, just like the
case of a stranger denying the paternity of a person from his well known
father. The reason is that the governing basis in case of paternity is lawful
access for sexual relations, and unlawful access is related to it, therefore,
his denying valid access amounts to qadhf until it becomes evident that
unlawful access is now linked to it. Her demand of proceedings is stipu-
lated as it is her right, therefore, it is necessary that the demand is initiated
by her as in the case of all other rights.
If he refuses to take the oath of li'än, the judge is to imprison him
until he takes the oath of li'ãn or declares himself to be a liar. The reason
is that it is a right being claimed from him and he is in a position to meet
this claim, thus, he is imprisoned until he delivers what is being claimed
from him or declares himself to be untruthful so that the cause of action
is removed.
If he agrees to the process of Wan, the procedure of li'ãn becomes
obligatory upon him, due to the text that we have recited, however, we
begin with the husband for he is the complainant.
If she refuses to take the oath, the qadi is to imprison her till she
takes the oaths or deems him truthful. The reason is that it is his right
against her, and she is able to meet the claim, therefore, she is imprisoned
on account of it.
Where the husband is a slave, or an unbeliever' or has been convicted
for qadhf, and he commits qadhf against his wife, he is to be subjected to
the hadd. The reason is that li'ãn is not possible due to a disqualification
found in him, therefore, it is converted to the original obligation, which is
established by the words of the Exalted, "And those who launch a charge
against chaste women, and produce not four witnesses (to support their
allegations) ,—flog them with eighty stripes; and reject their evidence ever
after: for such men are wicked transgressors; Except those who repent
thereafter and mend (their conduct); for Allah is Oft-Forgiving, Most
Merciful ."3 Li'ãn is a substitutory duty for this (primary) obligation.
If the wife is one who is qualified to testify, but is an unbelieving
slave or has been awarded hadd for qadhf, or is one whose false accuser
is not punished, like being a minor, or insane, or one convicted for zinã,
'This is the case where both spouses are unbelievers and the wife accepts Islam after
which he accuses her, but prior to the extending of the invitation to him for accepting
Islam. Al-'Ayni, vol. 5, 566. The text has been taken from Fath al-Qadir.
3Qur'an 24: 4,5

--- Page 767 ---

Al-Hidayah(cid:9)
BOOK VIII: DIVORCE(cid:9) 51
then, there is neither hadd for him nor li'cin, due to the negation of the
legal capacity of rendering testimony, the lack of ihsãn (chastity), and
this is from her side. The prevention of li'ãn is due to a fault in her, there-
fore, hadd is waived; it is as if she confirmed his statement. The legal
basis for this are the words of the Prophet (God bless him and grant
him peace), "There are four persons between whom and their spouses
there is no li'ãn: a Jew or a Christian woman married to a Muslim; a slave
woman married to a freeman; and a freewo man married to a slave."4 If the
spouses have been convicted (and punished) for qadhf, then, the husband
will be subjected to hadd, because the prevention of the li'ãn procedure
is due to a fault in him as he is not eligible for it.
The description of li'ãn is that the qadi begins with the husband.
He testifies four times, saying each time, "I testify by Allah that I am
truthful in my accusing her of zin?' The fifth time, he says, "The curse
of Allah be on him, if he is untruthful with respect to his accusation of
zinã?' In all these statements he points towards her. The wife then testi-
fies four times, saying each time, "I testify by Allah that he is untruthful
in the accusation he has made against me with respect to zinä. In the
fifth testimony, she says, "The wrath of Allah be on her if he is truthful
with respect to the accusation against me about zinã." The legal basis in
all this is the text that we have already recited. It is narrated by al-Hasan
from AbU HanIfah (God bless him) that he is to use the form of direct
address by saying, "In what I have accused you of zinã" insofar as that
is explicit in removing uncertainty. The reasoning underlying what has
been stated in the Book (by al-Quduri) is that when the form used for
one absent is corroborated by pointing to her the probability of uncer-
tainty is removed.
He said: When they have both made the statements of li'ãn, a separa-
tion does not occur between them until the qãdi separates them with his
pronouncement. Zufar (God bless him) said that separation does occur
by their li'ãn statements, because perpetual prohibition is established by
the operation of the tradition.' We argue that the proof of prohibition
4 Ibn Majah and al-Dar'qutni have recorded it in their Sunan. A1-Zayla'i, vol. 3, 248.
5A1-Zav'ali says that it appears he is pointing to the tradition, "The spouses partic-
ipating in li'ãn can never come together." He says that it is recorded by AbU DãwUd in
his Sunan. A1-Zayla'i, vol. 3, 249, 250. Al-'Ayni says that it has been recorded by 'Abd
al-Razzaq as a mawquf tradition. Al-'Ayni, vol. 5, 571.

--- Page 768 ---

52(cid:9) Al-Hidãyah(cid:9) BOOK VIII: DIVORCE
eliminates the retention of the relationship in fairness, therefore, the hus-
band is to adopt fairness. If he refuses to do so, the qãdi becomes his
deputy in order to avoid injustice. This is indicated by the Companion
who said, "I have accused her unjustly, and she is divorced thrice if I take
her back ."6 This he said after the li'ãn proceedings.
The separation will amount to a single irrevocable repudiation,
according to Abü klanifah and Muhammad (God bless them), because
the act of the qãdi is attributed to him. He can propose again if he
declares himself to be untruthful, according to the two jurists. Abü Yüsuf
(God bless him) maintains that it amounts to perpetual prohibition
due to the words of the Prophet (God bless him and grant him peace),
"The spouses participating in li'ãn can never come together, '7 which is
explicit in the meaning of perpetual prohibition. The two jurists main-
tain that admitting falsehood amounts to retraction and testimony has
no force after retraction. Further, they cannot come together as long as
they remain in the state of li'ãn, but such li'ãn no longer subsists and
has no legal value after admission of falsehood, therefore, they can come
together.
If the li'ãn was based upon the denial of paternity, the qãdi annuls
his paternity and associates him with his mother's name. The form of
li'ãn (in this case) is that the qãdi orders the man to say, and he says:
"I testify by Allah that I am truthful in what I have accused you of with
respect to the denial (of the paternity) of the child." The similar form is
adopted from the woman's side.
If he accuses her of zinã and also denies the paternity of the child, he
mentions both things in his ii 'an statement. Thereafter the qadi revokes
the paternity of the child and associates it with its mother. This is based
upon the report "that the Prophet (God bless him and grant him peace)
revoked the paternity of the child of Hilãl ibn Umayyah's wife with respect
to Hilãl and associated it with her."' Further, the purpose of this li'dn is
the denial of paternity for the child and this purpose is achieved com-
pletely, and it is included in the pronouncement of separation through
the judgement. It is reported from Abü Yüsuf (God bless him) that he
said: The qadi pronounces the separation and says, "I have made him
61t has been recorded by al-Bukhãri, Muslim, Abü Dawüd and others. Al-Zayla'i, vol.
3,249-50-
'See note above.
8 ft is recorded by Abü DawUd and others. Al-Zayla'i, vol. 3, 251.

--- Page 769 ---

BOOK VIII: DIVORCE(cid:9) Al-Hidãyah(cid:9) 53
a dependant of his mother and removed him from the paternity of the
father." As denial of paternity is independent of separation, it is necessary
to mention it.
If the husband repeats the accusation and then admits that he was
lying, the qadi is to subject him to hadd,9 due to his admission leading to
the obligation of awarding hadd to him. And he permits him to remarry
her. This is the view according to the two jurists, because after the award-
ing of hadd, he is no longer eligible to participate in li'ãn, therefore, the
rule on which it is based, which is perpetual prohibition, is also removed.
Likewise if he commits qadhf against another woman and is awarded
hadd for it, due to what we have explained. And likewise if she commits
zinã and is awarded hadd,'° due to the negation from her side of the eli-
gibility for li'ãn.
If he commits qadhf against his wife, who is a minor or is insane,
there is no li'ãn between them. The reason is that hadd is not awarded to
the accuser of such a woman, even if she is a stranger, thus, the husband
is not to proceed with li'ãn as he stands in the same position. Likewise if
the husband is a minor or is insane, due to the lack of liability in such a
case.
Qadhf by a dumb person is not relevant for li'än, because it per-
tains to an express accusation like the hadd of qadhf. In this al-Shãfi'i
(God bless him) disagrees, however, the basis is that this case is not free
of doubt and the hudüd are to be waived on account of doubt.
If the husband says to her, "Your pregnancy is not due to me," then
there is no li'ãn between them. This is the view of Abü Hanifah and
Zufar (God bless them), because he is not sure of the existence of preg-
nancy," therefore, he does not become an accuser (qadhif). AbU Yüsuf
and Muhammad (God bless them) said that li'dn becomes obligatory by
the denial of pregnancy when he denies it in a period that is less than
six months, which is the point made (by Muhammad) in al-As!, because
9This is the case where she has not been irrevocably divorced after the accusation.
If, however, this takes place after the irrevocable divorce, there is neither hadd nor Wan,
because the purpose of li'ãn is separation. This is the view of al-Sarakhsi as quoted by
al-'Ayni, vol. 5, 576.
"The question arises as to how she can remarry when she has been awarded hadd,
which should be rajm in her case. The response given is that this is a case where she has
been accused prior to consummation of marriage in which case the hadd will be ioo
stripes and not rajm. See al-'Ayni, vol. 5, 576.
"Perhaps, he is not sure of being able to cause a pregnancy.

--- Page 770 ---

54(cid:9) A!-Hidãyah(cid:9) BOOK VIII: DIVORCE
we come to know for sure about pregnancy in such a period," therefore,
qadhf is affirmed. We would say to this that if it does not amount to qadhf
immediately, then, it becomes subject to a condition. It is as if he is saying
to her, "If you are pregnant, then it is not because of me." Qadhf that is
suspended upon a condition does not take place.
If he says to his wife, "You have committed zinä and this pregnancy
is due to zinã' they are to undergo the procedure of li'ãn. This is due
to the existence of qadhf as he has expressly mentioned zinã. The qadi in
this case will not revoke paternity. A1-Shãfi'i (God bless him) said that he
is to revoke paternity, because the Prophet (God bless him and grant him
peace) revoked the paternity of the child of Hiläl as he had accused her
when she was pregnant.13 We maintain that the legal effects do not take
place except after the birth of the child due to the possibility of absence of
pregnancy. The tradition is construed to mean that he had come to know
about the existence of conception on the basis of revelation.
If a man denies the child of his wife after birth or at a time when
felicitations are accepted and things subsequent to birth are procured,
his denial is valid and li'än proceedings are in order. If he denies it after
this, he is to undergo Wan, but paternity is established. This is the view
according to Abü IIanifah (God bless him). AbU YUsuf and Muhammad
(God bless them) said that his denial is valid if it takes place within the
postnatal period. The reason is that denial is valid within a short period,
but is not valid after a long period, and we have separated the two periods
with the period of nifãs (postnatal period), because it is the consequence
of birth. The Imam (God bless him) says that there is no point in such
fixing of durations, because time is needed for pondering over the mat-
ter and the situation of people differs with circumstances. Accordingly,
he says, we have taken into account things that indicate lack of denial
and these are like his acceptance of felicitations, or his silence when con-
gratulated, or his buying of things needed after birth, or the passage of
this period with his non-denial of paternity. If he was absent and did not
know about the birth, but arrives thereafter, the period will be taken into
account on the basis of both rulings that we have mentioned.14
"This is also the minimum period for pregnancy.
131t has preceded.
'4The view of the Imãm and the two jurists.

--- Page 771 ---

BOOK VIII: DIVORCE(cid:9) Al-Hidayah(cid:9) 55
He said: If she gives birth to twins through the same pregnancy and
he denies the first and accepts the second, their paternity stands estab-
lished as they have been conceived as twins from the same sperm. The
husband is to be subjected to hadd, because he has admitted his false-
hood through the second claim.
If he accepts the first and denies the second, their paternity stands
established, on the basis of what we have mentioned, and they undergo
li'än proceedings. The reason is that he has become a qadhif through the
denial of the second and has not retracted his claim. The acknowledge-
ment of chastity is prior to the commission of qadhf. It is as if he first said
that she is chaste and then said that she is a zãniyah. In such a situation
li'ãn is the consequence, so also here.

--- Page 772 ---

56(cid:9) Al-Hidayah(cid:9) BOOK VIII: DIVORCE

--- Page 773 ---

Chapter
72
Impotence and Other Causes of Divorce
If the husband is impotent the qadi is to grant him a year. If he is able to
cohabit with her, then it is good, otherwise he is to announce a separa-
tion between them if the woman makes a request for that. This is how it
has been reported from 'Umar, 'All and Ibn Mas'Ud (God be pleased with
them).' The reason is that her right to intercourse is established, but it is
probable that the inability may be due to some temporary ailment and it
is probable that it is due to a congenital defect. It is, therefore, necessary
to have a duration to gain knowledge about this. We have fixed this dura-
tion to be a year as it consists of all the four seasons. When the period
is over and he has not been able to cohabit with her, it becomes obvious
that it is due to some congenital (or permanent) defect. This leads to the
demise of retention in marriage according to what is good, and dealing
with her in fairness becomes obligatory. If he refuses, the qadi acts as his
representative and pronounces the separation between them. It is neces-
sary that the woman demand separation, because separation is her right
(in such a case).
This separation amounts to a single irrevocable repudiation. The
reason is that the act of the qadi is attributed to the husband; it is as if he
has divorced her himself. Al-Shãfl'i (God bless him) said that it is revoca-
tion, however, nikãh does not accept revocation in our view. It amounts
to an irrevocable divorce, because the purpose, which is the elimination
of injustice to her, cannot be achieved without it. If it is not irrevocable,
the woman will be suspended due to the possibility of retraction.
'These reports are to be found in the works of 'Abd al-Razzaq, Muhammad ibn al-
Hasan al-Shaybani and Ibn Abi shaybah. A1-Zayla'i, vol. 3, 254.
57

--- Page 774 ---

58(cid:9) Al-Hidayah(cid:9) BOOK VIII: DIVORCE
She is entitled to full dower if he went into seclusion with her,
because seclusion with an impotent husband is valid. The waiting period
is obligatory, because of what we elaborated earlier. This is the case where
the husband acknowledges that he has not been able to have intercourse
with her.
If the husband and wife differ about his being able to have inter-
course with her, then if she is a non-virgin the acceptable statement will
be that of the husband along with his oath. The reason is that he is deny-
ing the entitlement to the right of separation, and the basis is the fitness
or the functioning of the organ.
Thereafter, if he takes the oath, her right is extinguished, but if he
refuses the matter is to be delayed for a year. If she is a virgin, the women
are to examine her and if they testify that she is a virgin the delay of a
year is to be granted, due to the manifestation of his falsehood. If they
say that she is deflowered, the husband is to be administered the oath. If
he takes the oath, she has no right, but if he refuses the matter is delayed
for a year. If he has a cut up organ, the separation is to be pronounced
at once if she so demands. The reason is that there is no use in delaying
the matter. The case of a castrated man is also be to be delayed like that
of the impotent person, because there is some hope of his being able to
cohabit.
If the impotent man is granted a year and then he says that I have had
intercourse with her, but she denies it, she is to be examined by women.
If they say that she is a virgin, she is to be given an option. The reason is
that their testimony has affirmed the underlying factor and that is virgin-
ity. If they say that she is a non-virgin, the husband is to be administered
the oath. If he refuses to take the oath, she is granted the option, due
to the confirmation of her position because of his refusal. If he takes the
oath, she is not granted an option.
If she was originally a non-virgin, the acceptable statement is the
husband's along with his oath. We have mentioned this already.
If she chooses her husband, she will no longer have an option. The
reason is that she has agreed to the extinction of her right. In the case of
delay, the lunar year is to be taken into account, and that is the sound
narration. The calculation is to be made without excluding the days of
menstruation and the month of Ramadãn because of their occurrence
within the year. The days of his illness and her illness are not to be
counted, because such illness may not occur within a year.

--- Page 775 ---

BOOK VIII: DIVORCE(cid:9) Al-Hidãyah(cid:9) 59
If the wife has a defect, the husband does not have an option (of
revocation). Al-Shãfi'i (God bless him) said that she is to be rejected
on account of five defects: leprosy; baras (skin disease); insanity, ratq;2
and qarn.3 The reason is that they prevent contact for physical access and
desire. Desire is emphasised in the shar' (law) due to the words of the
Prophet (God bless him and grant him peace) "Run from the person with
leprosy like you run from the lion."4 We argue that the extinction of sat-
isfaction essentially upon death does not lead to revocation, therefore, it
is necessary that by mere disturbance due to defects it should not be so.
The reason is that satisfaction is derived from the fruits of marriage, and
the claim is that these be available and they are.
If the husband suffers from insanity, baras or leprosy, then the wife
does not have an option (of revocation) according to AbU Hanifah and
AbU Yüsuf (God bless them). Muhammad (God bless him) said that she
does have the option, so as to repel injury to her, as in the case of loss
of organ or impotence, as distinguished from his case for he is able to do
away with the injury through divorce. The two jurists maintain that the
basis is the absence of an option insofar as it amounts to annulling the
right of the husband. It is granted in the case of a partially missing organ
or impotence as they prevent the attainment of the objective for which
marriage has been made lawful. These defects, on the other hand, do not
upset such objective, therefore, the two are distinguished. Allah knows
best what is correct.
'Birth defect in which the vulva is blocked, because the sides of the vulva are joined
together.
'Birth defect in which the vulva is blocked due to bone structure or other reason.
4Recorded by al-Bukhari. See al-Zayla'i, vol. 3, 255.

--- Page 776 ---

60(cid:9) Al-Hidyah(cid:9) BOOK VIII: DIVORCE

--- Page 777 ---

Chapter 73
'Iddah (Waiting Period)
If a man divorces his wife through an irrevocable or a revocable repu-
diation, or a separation occurs between them without divorce,' when
she is a freewoman who has menstrual periods, then her 'iddah (wait-
ing period) extends to three periods, due to the words of the Exalted,
"Divorced women shall wait concerning themselves for three monthly
periods."' Separation when it takes place without divorce bears the mean-
ing of divorce, because 'iddah has been made obligatory to identify the
vacation of the womb in a separation that is imposed upon nikãh, and
this occurs within the separation. The term "period" is applied to mean
menses in our view. Al-Shãfi'i (God bless him) said that it applies to the
period of purity. The word qurü' in its actual application is used for both
meanings and has been used for the opposite meanings. This is what has
been stated by Ibn al-Sikkit. It does not, however, apply to both meanings
at the same time as a mushtarak word. Construing it to mean menses is
better. First, by acting upon the plural meaning, because applying it to
mean period of purity where divorce takes place in a period of purity
prevents it from being a plural. Second, in its meaning as an identifier
of the vacation of the womb, which is the purpose of 'iddah. Third, by
interpreting it in the light of the words of the Prophet (God bless him
and grant him peace), "The waiting period of the slave woman are two
menses' and these words act as an elaboration (bayãn) for the word.
If she is one who does not menstruate due to young or old age, then,
her waiting period is three months, due to the words of the Exalted,
'This separation may occur through khiyar al-buligh, emancipation, one spouse
coming to own the other, and apostasy. A1-'Ayni, vol. 5, 593.
'Qur'an 2: 228
61

--- Page 778 ---

62(cid:9) Al-Hidayah(cid:9) BOOK VIII: DIVORCE
"Such of your women as have passed the age of monthly courses, for them
the prescribed period, if ye have any doubts, is three months."' Likewise
those who have reached the age of puberty, but have not begun to men-
struate, due to the words at the end of the verse.4
If she is pregnant, then, her 'iddah is up to the time she delivers the
child, due to the words of the Exalted, "For those who are pregnant, their
period is until they deliver their burdens."'
If the wife is a slave woman her 'iddah is two menses, due to the
words of the Prophet (God bless him and grant him peace), "The divorce
of the slave woman is two repudiations and her waiting period is up to
two menses." 6 The reason is that slavery converts matters into half, but
the menstrual period cannot be halved, therefore, they are fixed at two
menses. This is what 'Umar (God be pleased with him) is reported to
have said, "If I could I would have deemed it a menses and a half."7 If the
slave woman is one who does not menstruate, then her waiting period is
a month and a half. The reason is that it can be divided and it is possible
to make it half while acting upon the attribute of slavery.
The waiting period of a freewoman in the case of death (of her hus-
band) is four months and ten days, due to the words of the Exalted, "If
any of you die and leave widows behind, they shall wait concerning them-
selves four months and ten days."' The waiting period of a slave woman
(in this case) is two months and five days, because slavery converts it to
half.
If she is pregnant, then, her waiting period is until she delivers, due
to the unqualified meaning of the verse, "For those who are pregnant,
their period is until they deliver their burdens."9 'Abd Allah ibn Mas'Ud
(God be pleased with him) said, "If anyone wants I can engage with him
in mutual curses to show that this verse was revealed after the verse that is
in Sürat al-Baqarah."° 'Umar (God be pleased with him) said that "if she
3Qur'an 65: 4
4That is, "And for those who have no courses (it is the same)." Qur'an 65 : 4
'Qur'an 65: 4
61t is recorded from 'A'ishah and Ibn 'Umar (God be pleased with them). The differ-
ent versions are recorded by Abü Dawüd, al-Tirmidhi, Ibn Majah and others. A1-Zayla'i,
vol. 3, 226, 255.
71t is reported by 'Abd al-Razzaq. A1-'Ayni, vol. 3, 256.
8Qur'5n 3: 234
9Qur'an 65: 4
"It is recorded by al-Bukhari. Al-Zayla'i, vol. 3, 256.
II.

--- Page 779 ---

BOOK VIII: DIVORCE(cid:9) Al-Hidãyah(cid:9) 63
delivers while her husband is yet on the bier, her waiting period is over
and it is lawful for her to marry."
If the divorced woman comes to inherit during the terminal illness
of her husband, her waiting period is the longer of the two periods.
This is the view according to Abü Hanifah and Muhammad (God bless
them), while Abü YUsuf (God bless him) said that it is three menses. The
meaning here is that when the divorce is irrevocable or has been pro-
nounced thrice. If, however, it is revocable, then she is to observe the
waiting period of death by agreement. According to Abü YUsuf (God bless
him), the marriage stood dissolved prior to death through divorce, and
she was obliged to wait for three menses. The waiting period following
death becomes obligatory when the marriage is terminated during death,
except that it subsists for the right of inheritance and not for altering the
right to alter the waiting period. This is distinguished from the revoca-
ble divorce, because there the marriage subsists in all respects. The two
jurists argue that as it subsists for purposes of inheritance it is deemed to
subsist, by way or precaution, for the purpose of waiting period as well
thereby reconciling the two. If the husband is executed as a result of his
apostasy where the wife inherits from him, then, the issue is governed
by the same disagreement. It is also said that her waiting period is gov-
erned by the periods of menstruation, on the basis of consensus (ijmã'),
because marriage in such a case is not considered to subsist till the time
of death for purposes of inheritance as a Muslim woman cannot inherit
from an unbeliever.
If a slave woman is emancipated within her waiting period following
a revocable divorce, her waiting period is converted to the waiting period
of free women, because of the continuance of marriage in all respects. If
she is emancipated following an irrevocable divorce or is one whose hus-
band has died, her waiting period is not converted to that for freewonn
due to the termination of marriage after an irrevocable divorce or death.
If she is a woman who has had menopause and is undergoing the
waiting period on the basis of months, and then sees bleeding, her wait-
ing period that has passed is erased and she is to renew her waiting
period on the basis of menses. This means that if she witnesses bleed-
ing as was usual for her. The reason is that her reverting to her normal
"It is recorded by Mãlik (God bless him) in al-Muwatta'. Al-Zayla'i, vol. 3, 256.

--- Page 780 ---

64(cid:9) Al-HitMyah(cid:9) BOOK VIII: DIVORCE
courses annuls the menopause, which is the correct view, thus, it is appar-
ent that it is not a substitutory duty. The reason is that the condition for
substituting a duty is the confirmation of menopause and this takes place
through the inability (to bleed) until death, as is the case of fidyah (ran-
som) for the enfeebled old person. If, however, she has two menstrual
periods (in her waiting period) and then her menopause, she is to calcu-
late her waiting period on the basis of months, as a precaution in order
to avoid combining what is substitutory with the original.
In the case of a woman who is married through an irregular nikãh,
and a woman who has had intercourse on the basis of shubhah, their
waiting period, both in the case of separation and death, is through
menses. The reason is that this is for identifying the vacation of the
womb and not for complying with the requirements of marriage, because
menses are the identifier for this purpose.
If the master of a slave woman, who has borne him a child, dies or
he emancipates her, then, her 'iddah is up to three menses. Al-Shãfi'i
(God bless him) said that it is a single menstruation. The reason is
that it becomes obligatory due to the termination of lawful ownership,
therefore, it resembles vacation of the womb. We argue that it becomes
obligatory due to the termination of the relationship permitting lawful
access for sex, therefore, it resembles the 'iddah of nikãh. Thereafter, our
leader in this is 'Umar (God be pleased with him), for he said: "The 'iddah
of the 'umm al-walad is three menses. If she is one who does not men-
"2
struate, then, her waiting period is three months, as in the case of nikã/-i.
If the minor husband of a woman dies and she is pregnant, then, her
'iddah is up to the time she delivers. This is the view according to Abü
Hanifah and Muhammad (God bless them). AbU Yüsuf (God bless him)
said that her waiting period is for four months and ten days, which is also
the opinion of al-Shãfi'i (God bless him). The reason is that the preg-
nancy is not established as to paternity with respect to him. It is as if it
occurred after his death. The two jurists argue on the basis of the unqual-
ified meaning of the verse, "For those who are pregnant, their period is
until they deliver their burdens."" The reason is that it is determined by
the period of delivery irrespective of the period being more or less, and is
not for the identification of the vacation of the womb, because the waiting
`2A1-Zayla'i says that it is gharib, however, he records a similar statement from 'Amr
ibn al-'Ass. A1-Zayla'i, vol. 3, 258.
13 Qur'an 65: 4

--- Page 781 ---

BOOK VIII: DIVORCE(cid:9) Al-Hidayah(cid:9) 65
period following death has been validated despite the existence of menses.
The purpose is to meet the requirements of the contract of nikãh. This
meaning is realised in the case of the minor even if the pregnancy was
not due to him. This is is distinguished from a pregnancy conceived after
the death of the husband, for once the waiting period becomes obligatory
on the basis of months, it cannot be altered due to later conception. In
the case that we are considering, when the waiting period became oblig-
atory it became so with the duration of the waiting period, therefore,
the two are distinguished. This point does not affect the wife of a grown
up (major) man when the pregnancy occurs after his death, because the
paternity will be attributed to him; it is as if it existed legally at the time
of death.
The paternity of the child will not be established in either case.14 The
reason is that the minor does not have sperm, therefore, conception on
his account cannot be thought of, so the nikã/i acts as the substitute for
sperm conceptually.
If a man divorces his wife during her menstrual period, she is not
to reckon the period in which the divorce occurred, because the waiting
period is determined to be three complete menses, thus, their number is
not to be reduced.
If a woman undergoing 'iddah is made to cohabit due to shubhah
(doubt), then, she is to undergo another 'iddah. The two waiting periods
will run concurrently and the bleeding that the woman witnesses during
menses will be counted towards both. When the first waiting period ter-
minates, and the other has not ended, it is obligatory for the woman to
complete the second waiting period. This is our view. A1-Shãfi'i (God
bless him) said that the two waiting periods will not run concurrently.
The purpose is worship, he said, and it is worship that prevents marriage
and going out of the house, therefore, the periods will not run concur-
rently just like two fasts cannot be undertaken in one day. Our argument
is that the purpose is to verify the vacation of the womb, and this purpose
is achieved with one waiting period, therefore, they will run concurrently.
The meaning of worship here is secondary. Do you not see that the wait-
ing period passes without her knowledge even if she gives up not going
out?
That is, conception before death or after it.
14

--- Page 782 ---

66 (cid:9) Al-Hidayah(cid:9) BOOK VIII: DIVORCE
If a woman undergoing 'iddah following death is led to cohabitation
as a result of doubt, she is to undergo the waiting period on the basis of
months and she is also to take account of the menses occurring during
this period. This is to ensure concurrence as far as it is possible.
The commencement of 'iddah in the case of divorce is after the
divorce, while in the case of death it is after death. If she does not come
to know of the divorce or the death till such time that the duration of
the waiting period is over, then, her 'iddah is over. The reason is that the
cause of the waiting period is either divorce or death, therefore, its com-
mencement is reckoned from the time the cause comes into existence.
Our jurists (from Bukhãrah) have issued a ruling (fatwã) in the case of
divorce that the commencement of the waiting period is from the time of
acknowledgement (of divorce) so that the accusation of having conspired
is avoided.
The (commencement of the) waiting period arising from afasid con-
tract is after separation, or after the determination of the man that
he will not have intercourse with her. Zufar (God bless him) said that
it begins after the last intercourse, because it is intercourse that is the
obligating cause. We argue that each intercourse found within the fasid
contract is like a single intercourse due to the association of all with the
rule for a single contract. It is for this reason that it is sufficient to have
a single dower for all. Accordingly, the commencement of the waiting
period is not established prior to mutual relinquishment or determina-
tion to abstain when there is the likelihood of another taking place (after
the last). Further, the ability to undertake it by way of shubhah acts as a
substitute for actual intercourse due to its concealed nature, and there is
a need to know the rule for the sake of the right of another man.
If a woman undergoing the waiting period says that her 'iddah has
terminated, but her husband denies this, then the acceptable statement
will be that of the wife along with her oath. The reason is that she is con-
sidered trustworthy in this, and when she has been accused of falsehood
she takes the oath, just like the custodian of a deposit.
If a man divorces his wife through an irrevocable divorce, and there-
after marries her during her waiting period, but divorces her (again)
prior to cohabitation, he is liable for a complete dower, and she has to
undergo a subsequent (renewed) 'iddah. This is the view according to
AbU Hanifah and Abü Yüsuf (God bless them). Muhammad (God bless
him) said that he is liable for one-half dower and she is to complete

--- Page 783 ---

BOOK VIII: DIVORCE(cid:9) Al-Hidäyah(cid:9) 67
the previous waiting period. The reason is that it is a divorce prior to
touching, therefore, it does not give rise to full dower nor the renewal
of the waiting period. The completion of the first 'iddah is due to the
first divorce, when the second marriage has not affected the first waiting
period. Thus, when the legal effects of the second marriage are removed
through the second divorce, the legal effects of the first come into view, as
if he had bought his slave woman who had borne him children and then
emancipated her. The two jurists maintain that she is within his grasp in
reality due to the first intercourse and its effect remains, which is the wait-
ing period. Thus, when he renews the marriage, while she is still under his
control, the first control stands in the place of the second control to which
he derived the right through this marriage. It is like a usurper buying the
usurped item that is in his possession, where he (now) comes to have pos-
session by the contract alone. This makes it evident that it is divorce after
cohabitation. Zufar (God bless him) said there is no waiting period at all
for her, because the first waiting period was extinguished by the second
marriage and cannot return, while the second was never imposed. The
response to his view is what we have said.
If a Dhimmi divorces a Dhimmiyyah, there is no waiting period for
her. Likewise, if a woman from the enemy land crosses over to Our side
as a Muslim. If she marries it is valid, unless she is pregnant. This is the
view according to AbU Hanifah (God bless him). The two jurists said
she as well as the Dhimmiyah have to undergo the waiting period. As for
the Dhimmiyyah, the disagreement here is similar to the disagreement
about their marrying within the prohibited category, and we have elab-
orated this in the Book of Nikãh. The view of Abü Hanifah (God bless
him) applies where there is no waiting period for them according to their
belief. As for the woman migrating, the reasoning of the two jurists is that
if the separation had occurred between them due to another reason, there
would be a waiting period, likewise in the case of such separation. This is
distinguished from the case where a man migrates and leaves her behind
(there will be no waiting period) due to the lack of information about the
s/iari'ah. AbU Ianifah (God bless him) argues on the basis of the verse,
"0 ye who believe! When there come to you believing women refugees,
examine (and test) them: Allah knows best as to their Faith: if ye ascertain
that they are Believers, then send them not back to the Unbelievers. They
are not lawful (wives) for the Unbelievers, nor are the (Unbelievers) law-
ful (husbands) for them. But pay the Unbelievers what they have spent

--- Page 784 ---

68(cid:9) Al-Hidãyah(cid:9) BOOK VIII: DIVORCE
(on their dower), and there will be no blame on you if ye marry them on
payment of their dower to them, The reason is that when the waiting
"11
period becomes obligatory, the right of humans is attached to it, and the
enemy is associated with these rights so that he can be the subject mat-
ter of ownership. The exception is where the woman is pregnant, because
inside her womb is a child whose paternity is established. There is a nar-
ration from Abü Hanifah (God bless him) that it is permitted to marry
such a (pregnant) woman, but he is not to have intercourse with her, as
is the case with a woman pregnant after zind. The first view, however, is
more authentic.
73.1 MOURNING
For the irrevocably separated woman,16 as well as one whose husband
has died, when she is a major and a Muslim, is prescribed mourning.
As for the woman whose husband has died, it is due to the words of
the Prophet (God bless him and grant him peace), "It is not lawful for
a woman, who believes in Allah and the Day of Judgement, to mourn for
the dead in excess of three days, except for her husband for four months
and ten days?17 As for one irrevocably separated, it is the opinion of
our school. Al-Shãfi'i (God bless him) said that there is no obligation of
mourning for her. The reason is that it has been prescribed for expressing
sorrow upon the death of her husband who stood by his compact with her
till his death. The husband (separated from her) has cast her into despair
through separation so there is no cause for sorrow upon his loss. We rely
upon the report from the Prophet (God bless him and grant him peace)
in which he forbade the woman undergoing 'iddah from using henna as
a hair dye. He said, "Henna is perfume."" Further, the reason is that it is
necessary to express sorrow for the loss of the blessing of marriage, which
15 Qur'an 60: 10
16 Through divorce or khul' and so on.
This tradition has been reported through many sound channels and the various
17
traditions have been recorded by most of the authentic compilations. Al-Zayla'i, vol. 3,
260.
18 This tradition has preceded in the section on offences during hajj. It is recorded by
AbU DawUd in his Sunan. A1-Zayla'i, vol. 3, 261.

--- Page 785 ---

BOOK VIII: DIVORCE(cid:9) A1-Hidayah(cid:9) 69
was the cause of her protection and support for her subsistence. Separa-
tion is more severe for her in this case than death insofar as she can bathe
her dead husband prior to separation but not later.
Hidàd (mourning), also called ihdãd, and both are part of usage, is
that the woman give up perfume, adornment, kohl, and the use of oil
whether it is perfumed or non-perfumed, except due to a valid excuse.
The narration in al-Jami' al-Saghir is: except when in pain. The underly-
ing reason is understood in two ways. The first is what we have mentioned
with respect to the expression of sorrow. The second is that these things
become a cause for arousing desire when she is prohibited from marry-
ing, therefore, she is to avoid them so that they do not become the means
for committing the prohibited. It has been reported through authentic
narrations from the Prophet (God bless him and grant him peace) that
he prohibited the woman undergoing 'iddah from using kohl,'9 while oil
is not free of some kind of perfume and is used for the adornment of hair.
It is for this reason that one in a ritual state of ihrãm has been prohibited
from using it. He (al-Quduri) said, "Except due to an excuse' because
there is necessity in it, but the meaning is for medicinal use not adorn-
ment. If the woman is used to applying oil and she fears pain (if avoided),
and if this is more likely, it is lawful for her to use it for the usual occur-
rence is like the actual. Likewise silk if she needs to wear it due to an
excuse; there is no harm in it.
She is not to use henna, due to what we have related nor is she to use
a dress dyed with the yellow dye or with saffron, because a pleasant smell
arises from such a dress.
He said: There is no hidad for the unbelieving woman, because the
claims of the shari'ah are not addressed to her. There is no hidãd for the
minor either, because the communication of liability is lifted in her case.
The slave woman is to undertake ihdãd, because the communication
of liability (khitãb) is addressed to her for meeting the duties owed as
rights of Allah insofar as these do not annul the right of the master. This
does not apply to going out of the house as it amounts to annulling the
right of the master, when the right of the individual has precedence due
to his need.
He said: There is no ihdad during the waiting period of the slave
mother nor one following afasid (irregular) marriage. The reason is that
191t is recorded by the six sound compilations. Al-Zayla'i, vol. 3, 261-62.

--- Page 786 ---

70(cid:9) Al-Hidãyah(cid:9) BOOK VIII: DIVORCE
they have not lost the blessing of nikãh so that sorrow be exhibited, and
permissibility is the original rule.
It is not proper to make a proposal of marriage to a woman undergo-
ing the waiting period, but there is no harm in conveying one's interest
in her. This is based upon the words of the Exalted, "There is no blame
on you if ye make an indirect offer of betrothal or hold it in your hearts.
Allah knows that ye cherish them in your hearts: But do not make a
secret contract with them except in terms honourable, nor resolve on the
tie of marriage till the term prescribed is fulfilled. And know that Allah
knoweth what is in your hearts, and take heed of Him; and know that
Allah is Oft-Forgiving, Most Forbearing."" The Prophet (God bless him
and grant him peace) said, "A secret proposal amounts to nikãh."21 Ibn
'Abbãs (God be pleased with him) said that ta'rid is when the man says,
"I need to get married." Sa'id ibn Jubayr (God be pleased with him) said
in a well known statement, "I am interested in you" and "I wish we could
be together."
It is not permitted to a woman divorced through a revocable repu-
diation or a woman separated irrevocably to go out of her house during
the day or night. A woman whose husband has died may go out dur-
ing the day and for part of the night, but she is not to spend the night
out of her house. As for the divorced woman, it is based upon the words
of the Exalted, "And turn them not out of their houses, nor shall they
(themselves) leave, except in case they are guilty of some open lewdness.
Those are limits set by Allah: and any who transgresses the limits of Allah,
does verily wrong his (own) soul: thou knowest not if perchance Allah
will bring about thereafter some new situation."" It is said that fahishah
(lewdness) here means going out of the house itself. It is also said that it
means zinã. They have to go out for the execution of the hadd.
As for the woman whose husband has died, the reason is that she does
not have any kind of maintenance, therefore, she has to go out for seeking
a livelihood and this may extend up to the arrival of the night. The case of
the divorced woman is not similar, because her maintenance is reaching
her from the wealth of her husband. If she bargained away her right to
maintenance through khul', it is said that she may go out during the day.
20 Qur'an 2: 235
1t is gha rib according to al-Zayla'i, but is recorded by Ibn Abi Shaybah. It was orig-
21
inally reported by Abü Bakr al-Rãzi. A1-Zayla'i, vol. 3, 262.
22 Qur'an 65: 1

--- Page 787 ---

BOOK VIII: DIVORCE(cid:9) Al-Hidãyah(cid:9) 71
It is also said that she is not to go out as she extinguished her own right,
therefore, this extinction cannot annul the claim that is made against her.
The woman undergoing the waiting period is to stay in the house
associated with her for her residence in case of the occurrence of separa-
tion or death (of husband). This is based upon the words of the Exalted,
"23
And turn them not out of their houses . The house attributed to her
is the house in which she lives, therefore, if she is visiting her relatives
and her husband divorces her, she is required to return to her house and
complete the waiting period there. The Prophet (God bless him and grant
him peace) is reported to have said to a woman whose husband was killed,
"Reside in your house till the term prescribed by the Book is complete."24
If her share in the house of the deceased is not sufficient for her, and
the heirs dispossess her of her share, she is to move out. The reason is
that this is moving out due to an excuse, and an excuse is effective in the
case of acts of worship. It is as if she is apprehensive about her goods or
she is apprehensive about the collapsing of the house, or that it is on rent
and she does not have enough to pay for it.
Thereafter if a separation occurs through an irrevocable divorce or
three repudiations, it is necessary to have a veil between them, after
which there is no harm in it (residing in the house). The reason is that the
husband has made known her prohibition, unless he is afasiq with whom
a woman is not safe. In such a case she is to leave the house, because it is
an excuse. She is not to move out of the house where she has moved. It is
better, however, that he move out of the house leaving her behind.
If they appoint a reliable woman who is able to act as a barrier, it
is good. If the space in the house becomes constricted, the woman is to
move out. His moving out, however, is better.
If a woman travels with her husband to Makkah and he divorces her
thrice or dies in a place other than the city, then, if there is between her
and her city a distance of less than three days travel she is to return to her
city. The reason is that it does not carry the meaning of moving out, but
is part of the entire duration. If the distance is equal to three days travel,
then she may return if she likes or spend the time of the period there
whether or not there is a wali with her. The meaning here is that when
there is three days journey towards the destination as well. The reason is
23 Qur'5n 65: 1
1t is recorded in the four Sunan. A1-Zayla'i, vol. 3,263.
24

--- Page 788 ---

72(cid:9) Al-Hidayah(cid:9) BOOK VIII: DIVORCE
that staying at this location is more fearsome for her than moving out,
except that returning is preferable so that the waiting period is spent in
the house of the husband.
He said: The exception is where her husband divorces her or dies
within a city. In this case she is not to come out and is to complete the
waiting period. After which she is to come out if there is a relative of the
prohibited degree with her. This is the view of Abü llanifah (God bless
him). Abu YUsuf and Muhammad (God bless them) said that if there
is such a mahram with her, there is no harm if she moves out of the city
prior to the completion of the waiting period. They argue that such mov-
ing out in itself is permissible in order to eliminate the torment of being a
stranger and the dread of being alone, and this acts as an excuse. The pro-
hibition pertains to travelling and this is removed with the presence of a
mahram. The Imãm (God bless him) argues that the waiting period bears
a greater prohibition as compared to the absence of a mahram, because a
woman is permitted to go out without a mahram for a distance that is less
than a journey. The woman undergoing the waiting period does not have
this permission. As going out for a journey is prohibited for her without
a mahram there is greater priority for prohibition during 'iddah.

--- Page 789 ---

Chapter 74
Proof of Paternity
A a man says, "If I marry so and so, she stands divorced:' and he then
marries her. If she gives birth to a child within six months from the day
he married her, the child belongs to him and he is liable to pay dower. As
for paternity, the reason is that he has legal access for intercourse, and as
she brought forth a child in six months of the marriage, she did so within
the minimum prescribed period from the time of divorce, therefore, the
conception took place before divorce in a state of marriage. This is con-
ceptually established as he married her while he was cohabiting with her,
therefore, ejaculation corresponded with marriage. Paternity is some-
thing in which precaution has to be exercised. As for dower, the reason is
that when paternity is established through him, he is legally considered
to have had intercourse, and dower is affirmed due to it.
He said: The paternity of the child of a woman divorced through a
revocable repudiation is established if she delivers the child within two
years or more as long as she does not acknowledge the termination of her
waiting period, due to the possibility of conception during the waiting
period and due to the validity of her being one with a lengthy period of
purity.
If she brings forth the child in less than two years, she stands irrevo-
cably separated from her husband upon the termination of her 'iddah,
and paternity of the child is established for the husband, due to the exis-
tence of conception during the period of marriage or the waiting period.
He is not deemed to have taken her back due the probability of concep-
tion prior to divorce. There is also the probability of conception after this,
but he will not be deemed to have retracted on the basis of doubt.
73

--- Page 790 ---

74(cid:9) Al-Hidüyah(cid:9) BOOK VIII: DIVORCE
If the woman gives birth to the child after more than two years, she
will be considered to have been taken back. The reason is that the con-
ception took place after divorce and it is obvious that it is due to him,
as the presumption is the absence of zinã on her part, thus, by having
intercourse he is deemed to have taken her back.
In the case of a woman separated irrevocably from her husband, the
paternity of the child stands established, if she gives birth to it in a period
that is less than two years. The reason is that there is a (legal) possibility
of the child having been conceived at the time of divorce, therefore, the
termination of legal access for intercourse will not be presumed, thus,
paternity will be established by way of precaution.
If she gives birth to the child upon the completion of two years
from the time of separation, paternity is not established, because the
pregnancy occurred after the divorce, therefore, it cannot be due to the
husband, because such intercourse is prohibited. Unless he claims such
paternity, because he has admitted to be bound by it, and his justification
will be that he had intercourse with her during the waiting period due to
doubt.
If the irrevocably separated female is a minor with whom sex is pos-
sible, and she gives birth to a child in nine months, it is not binding
on the husband for purposes of paternity, unless she gives birth to it
in a period that is less than nine months, according to Abü klanifah
and Muhammad (God bless them). AbU YUsuf (God bless him) said
that paternity is established through him up to two years. The reason
is that she is a woman undergoing the waiting period and she has not
acknowledged the termination of her 'iddah, therefore, she resembles a
major woman. The two jurists argue that for the termination of her wait-
ing period a duration is fixed and that is on the basis of months. When
the months pass, the law (shar') gives the ruling of termination, which is
legally more persuasive than her acknowledgement. The reason is that it
does not admit of disagreement, while her acknowledgement does admit
of it. If she is one who has been divorced through a revocable repudia-
tion, the response is the same in their view, but according to Abü YUsuf
(God bless him) paternity will be established up to seventeen months,
as he will be deemed to have cohabited with her towards the end of the
waiting period, which is of three months. Thereafter, she brings forth the
child within the maximum period of pregnancy, which is two years. If
she is a minor, who claims pregnancy within the waiting period, then

--- Page 791 ---

BOOK VIII: DIVORCE(cid:9) Al-Hidayah(cid:9) 75
the response in her case and in the case of a major woman is the same,
because by her acknowledgement the ruling of her becoming a major is
issued.
The paternity of the child of a woman whose husband has died is
established within a period that extends from the time of death up to
two years. Zufar (God bless him) said that if she delivers the child six
months after the time of termination of the waiting period, paternity is
not established. The reason is that the law (sharc) has ruled about the
duration of the waiting period by fixing it through the method of months,
therefore, it amounts to acknowledging the termination of the waiting
period, as we explained in the case of the minor. We say, however, that for
the determination of her waiting period there is another method, which
is the delivery of the child, as distinguished from the case of the minor,
because the basis in that was the absence of pregnancy. The reason is that
she is not presumed to conceive prior to attaining buligh in which there
is doubt.
If a woman in her waiting period acknowledges the termination of
her waiting period and thereafter gives birth to a child in less than six
months, the paternity of the child is established, because her falsehood
has been established with a certainty, therefore, her acknowledgement is
annulled. If she gives birth to the child within a period of (complete) six
months, it is not established. The reason is that we cannot know about
the falsehood of the acknowledgement due to the possibility of the con-
ception after it. This statement in its unqualified meaning applies to each
woman in her waiting period.
If a woman gives birth to a child, the paternity of the child is not
established, according to Abü Hanifah (God bless him), until two men
or one man and two women testify that birth has taken place, unless
there is an obvious pregnancy or there is acknowledgement of it on the
part of the husband, in which case paternity is established without testi-
mony. AbU YUsuf and Muhammad (God bless them) said that paternity
is established in all cases with the testimony of one woman, because legal
access to intercourse subsists with the continuance of the waiting period,
and this makes the husband bound by the ruling of paternity. Further, the
need is to determine that the child was delivered by the woman and this
is determined by her testimony as is the case of birth during the existence
of marriage. According to Abü Hanifah (God bless him), her 'iddah is
terminated through her acknowledgement and the birth of the child, but

--- Page 792 ---

76 (cid:9) A1-Hidayah(cid:9) BOOK VIII: DIVORCE
the termination is not valid proof, therefore, there is a need to establish
paternity ab initio, accordingly the meeting of the need is stipulated. This
is distinguished from the case where the pregnancy becomes obvious or
the husband issues an acknowledgement, because paternity is established
prior to birth and determination is established through her testimony.'
If a woman is undergoing the waiting period after the death of her
husband and the heirs deem her truthful about the birth of a child, and
none of them testifies to the effect, then the child belongs to the dead
husband, according to the unanimous view of the three jurists. This is
manifest with respect to the right of inheritance, which is solely their
right, therefore, their confirmation in this respect is accepted. As for the
right paternity, is it established with respect to others? They (the jurists)
said: If they are eligible as witnesses, the right of paternity is established
due to the furnishing of proof. It is for this reason it is said that the word
"testimony" is stipulated. It is also said that it is not stipulated, because
the proof with respect to others is secondary to the proof with respect to
the heirs through their acknowledgement. What is established as a sec-
ondary fact does not require the stipulation of conditions for it.
If a man marries a woman and she gives birth to a child within six
months from the day of marriage, the paternity of the child is not estab-
lished, because the conception precedes marriage, therefore, the child
does not belong to the husband. If she gives birth to it within six months
or more, paternity is established irrespective of the husband acknowl-
edging it or remaining silent. The reason is that legal access to intercourse
subsists and the period is complete.
If he denies the birth, it is established with the testimony of a single
woman, who renders testimony about the birth, so much so that if the
husband denies this he has to undertake li'ãn. The reason is that pater-
nity is established due to the continuance of the legal access for sexual
intercourse. Li'ãn becomes obligatory due to qadhf (false accusation of
unlawful sexual intercourse), and the existence of a child is not necessary
for it; it can be committed without the child.
If the woman gives birth to a child and then they differ with the
husband saying, "I married you four months ago' while she says, "You
married me six months ago' then the acceptable statement is hers and
the child is attributed to him. The reason is that the prima facie evidence
'That is, the testimony of the midwife.

--- Page 793 ---

BOOK VIII: DIVORCE(cid:9) Al-Hidayah(cid:9) 77
supports her, for she gives birth evidently as a result of marriage and not
as a result of an unlawful act. He has not mentioned the taking of oaths,
which is a matter that is disputed.
If he says to his wife, "If you give birth to a child you stand divorced,"
and after this a woman (midwife) testifies that she has given birth to a
child, she is not divorced, according to AbU Hanifah (God bless him).
AbU YUsuf and Muhammad (God bless them) said that she is divorced.
The reason is that her testimony amounts to proof for this purpose. The
Prophet (God bless him and grant him peace) said, "The testimony of
women, in things that men are not allowed to see, is permitted."' Fur-
ther, when it is accepted in matters of birth, it is acceptable in matters
that are based upon it, that is, divorce. According to AbU Hanifah (God
bless him), the wife is alleging the breaking of oath, and this cannot be
established without complete proof. The reason is that the testimony of
the woman in the case of birth is necessary, but it is not effective in the
case of divorce for that is a separate matter.
If the husband acknowledges the pregnancy, she stands divorced
without testimony, according to AbU Hanifah (God bless him). Accord-
ing to the two jurists, the testimony of the midwife is stipulated. The
reason is that it is essential to have proof for her claim of (the husband)
breaking his oath, and her testimony is proof for this according to what
we elaborated. AM Hanifah (God bless him) maintains that acknowl-
edgement of the pregnancy is also acknowledgement of what it leads to,
which is birth. Further, he has acknowledged her to be trustworthy, there-
fore, her statement is to be accepted when she gives back what is due.
He said: The maximum period for gestation is two years, due to the
words of 'A'ishah (God be pleased with her), "The child does not stay
in the womb for more than two years, even if it is like the shadow of
the spindle." I The minimum period is six months, due to the words of
the Exalted, "The carrying of the (child) to his weaning is (a period of)
thirty months, '4 after which the Almighty said, "And in years twain (two)
was his weaning"' This leaves six months (minimum) for the gestation
1t is gharib and is reported by Ibn Abi Shaybah as well as by 'Abd al-Razzaq. Al-
2
Zayla'i, vol. 3, 264.
31t is recorded by al-Dar'qutni and by al-Bayhaqi in their Sunan. A]-Zayla'i, vol. 3,
265-65.
4Qur'an 46:15
5Qur'an 31: 14

--- Page 794 ---

78(cid:9) Al-Hidäyah(cid:9) BOOK VIII: DIVORCE
period. Al-Shãfi'i (God bless him) determines the maximum period to be
four years, and the proof against him is what we have related. It is obvious
that she ('A'ishah) stated this on the basis of transmission, because reason
does not lead to this conclusion.
Where a person marries a slave woman then divorces her and there-
after buys her, if she brings forth a child in less than six months from
the date he bought her, he is bound by it (for purposes of paternity),
otherwise he is not bound to accept it. In the first situation (less than
six months), it is the child of a woman undergoing 'iddah, the concep-
tion being prior to purchase, while in the second case it is the child of
an owned slave, because the conception is to be attributed to the closest
time. It is, therefore, necessary to file a claim of paternity. This is the case
if it was a single irrevocable repudiation, khul' or a revocable repudia-
tion. If, however, two repudiations were pronounced, the paternity will
be established for up to two years from the time of divorce, for she was
prohibited for him with an enhanced prohibition, therefore, the concep-
tion cannot be attributed to a period other than what was prior to it,
because she cannot become permitted through purchase.
If a man says to his slave woman, "If there is a child in your womb, it
is due to me' and a woman testifies to the birth of a child, she becomes
his umm al-walad, because the need is to determine the existence of the
child. This is established through the testimony of the midwife, on the
basis of consensus (ijmã').
If a man says about a male slave, "He is my son' and thereafter dies
after which the mother of the slave appears and says that she is his wife,
then she is his wife and the boy his son; they will both inherit from him.
In the book al-Nawädir, this response is deemed to be istihsãn. Analogy
dictates that she is not entitled to inheritance, because just as paternity
is established through a valid nikãh, it is established through an irregu-
lar nikãh as well as through unlawful intercourse and lawful ownership,
therefore, his statement does not amount to acknowledgement of mar-
riage. The reasoning for istihsãn is that the issue applies where the woman
is known to be free and that she is the mother of a slave. A valid marriage
determines paternity both under the law and in practice.
If it is not known that she is a freewoman, and the heirs say, "You
are an umm al-walad' then there is no inheritance for her. The reason is
that proof of freedom on the basis of the dãr is admissible for refuting the
claim of slavery, but not for establishing inheritance. Allah knows best.

--- Page 795 ---

Chapter 75
Right to Custody of Child
If a separation occurs between the spouses, then the mother has a supe-
rior right to the custody of the child, due to the report that a woman
said, "0 Messenger of Allah, this child of mine, for him my belly is like a
cradle, my lap like a tent, and my breast like a beaker, but now his father
wants to separate him from me." The Prophet (God bless him and grant
him peace) said, "You have a superior right to him, as long as you do not
wed ."1 Further, the reason is that the mother is more loving and more
capable of bringing up (hadãnah) the child. Accordingly, there is greater
justice in giving the child to the mother. It is this toward which Abu Bakr
al-Siddiq (God be pleased with him) pointed when he said, "Her saliva
has greater blessing in it than the nectar and honey you will give him, 0
Umar."2 He said this when a separation occurred between him and his
wife making the statement when a large number of Companions (God be
pleased with them) were present. The maintenance is upon the father as
we shall mention.
The mother, however, is not to be forced to undertake hadänah,
because it is possible that she may become unable to bring up the child.
If the child does not have a mother,' then the mother's mother, how-
ever remote she might be, has a higher priority than the father's mother.
The reason is that this form of wilãyah (authority) belongs to the moth-
ers.
1 1t is recorded by AbU DawUd in his Sunan. A1-Zayla'i, vol. 3, 265.
1t is gharib in these exact words, but it has been recorded by Ibn Ab Shaybah and
2
others. Al-Zayla'i, vol. 3, 266.
31ncludes the case where she does not wish to take care of the child
79

--- Page 796 ---

8o(cid:9) Al-Hidãyah(cid:9) BOOK VIII: DIVORCE
If there is no mother's mother (or her mother) then the father's
mother is better than the sisters, for they too are mothers and for which
reason they are granted one-sixth of the inheritance being more loving
towards the offspring.
If the child does not have a paternal grandmother, then the sisters
have a higher priority as compared to the paternal and maternal aunts,
for they are the daughters of both parents. It is for this reason that we have
given them precedence for purposes of inheritance. In one narration it is
said that the maternal aunt has priority over a sister from the father's side,
due to the words of the Prophet (God bless him and grant him peace),
who said, "The maternal aunt is a mother?'4 It is also said that it is due to
the words of the Exalted, "And he raised his parents high on the throne,"'
where she was his maternal aunt.
The sister from both father and mother has been given precedence
for she is more loving thereafter the sister from the mother's side fol-
lowed by the sister from the father's side, because they have a greater
right on account of the mother.
Thereafter, the maternal aunts are preferable to the paternal aunts by
giving preference to the close relationship with the mother. They descend
just like we made the sisters descend. This means preference to those with
relationship from both sides and then according to the relationship with
the mother. Thereafter the descending scale for the paternal aunts is the
same.
And each one out of these who marries extinguishes her right, due to
what we have related, and also because the husband of the mother, when
he is a stranger, will give him what is less and will look down upon him,
which is not in the welfare of the child.
He said: The exception is the paternal grandmother when her hus-
band is the paternal grandfather, for he stands in the place of the father,
and will keep the welfare of the child in view. Likewise each husband who
is within the category of the prohibited degree,' due to the existence of
the love, taking into account the nearness of kin.
41t is reported from 'All, Ibn Mas'üd and Abü Hurayrah (God be pleased with them
all), and is recorded in various reports. A1-Zayla'i, vol. 3, 267-68.
5Qur'an 12: 100
'Like a paternal uncle if he marries the child's mother.

--- Page 797 ---

BOOK VIII: DIVORCE(cid:9) Al-Hidayah(cid:9) 81
For a woman who has lost her right due to marriage, the right will
revert if the marriage relationship is dissolved, because the obstacle
stands removed.
If the child does not have a woman among the relations and the men
disagree about him, then the preference is to be given to one who is clos-
est on the basis of 'asabiyyah (residuaries), because wilãyah belongs to
the nearest of kin, and the grades have been identified at the relevant
place. The infant girl, however, is not to be given to male relatives who
are not within the prohibited degree, like the emancipating master and
paternal uncle's son in order to avoid temptation.
The mother and the maternal grandmother have a greater right to
the custody of a boy until he is able to eat, drink, dress, and perform
istinjã' all by himself. In al-Jami' al-Saghir the statement is until he is
independent and is able to eat, drink and dress up all by himself. The
meaning of both statements is the same, as being completely indepen-
dent is possible with the ability to perform istinja'. The reasoning is that
once he is independent, he needs to be disciplined and to be taught the
manners and habits of men. The father is more capable of disciplining
him and give him training for the cultivation of the mind. A1-Khassaf
(God bless him) determined the age of independence to be seven years
going by the majority of the cases.
The mother and the maternal grandmother have a superior right for
the custody of the girl until she starts menstruating. The reason is that
after becoming independent she is in need of learning the ways of women
and the mother is more capable of imparting such training. After puberty,
she is more in need of security and protection, and the father is stronger
in this and in providing guidance. It is narrated from Muhammad (God
bless him) that she is to be given to the father when she reaches the age of
desire, for the need for protection is realised then.
Women other than the mother and maternal grandmother have a
greater right to the girl until she reaches the age of desire. In al-Jami' a!-
Saghir until she is independent. The reason is that these women cannot
employ her in work, and for this reason cannot give her services on hire,
therefore, the purpose is not attained, as distinguished from the mother
and maternal grandmother as they are able to do so under the law (shar').
The slave woman, when she is emancipated by the master, as well as
the umm al-walad when manumitted, are like the freewoman in their

--- Page 798 ---

82(cid:9) Al-Hidayah(cid:9) BOOK VIII: DIVORCE
rights of custody over the child. The reason is that they are both free-
women at the time of accrual of the right. They do not have the right to
custody of the child prior to their emancipation, because of the inability
to provide care to the child, being occupied with the service of the master.
The Dhimmi woman has a right to the custody of her children till
such age that they do not understand the difference between religions
or till the time that there is an apprehension that they will become
unbelievers, due to the loving care required prior to such age and the
likelihood of injury after it.
The boy and the girl do not have an option (in all this). Al-Shãfi'i
(God bless him) said that they do have an option, because the Prophet
(God bless him and grant him peace) granted them such an option.7 We
argue that the child, due to lack of discretion, will choose the person who
is more lenient and who gives a free hand for play. In such a case loving
care is not realised. It has been proved as authentic that the Companions
(God be pleased with them) did not grant an option.' As for the tradition,
we would say that the Prophet (God bless him and grant him peace) said,
"0 Lord, guide him,"9 and with his prayer the child was guided in his
choice. In the alternative, the tradition will be construed to apply to a
child who is a major.
75.1 LEAVING THE CITY
If a divorced woman wishes to leave the city along with her child, then
she does not have the right to do so, due to the injury in this to the father.
Unless she is going with the child to her hometown, and it is a town
where the husband married her, because the husband made that location
binding for himself according to custom and the law (shar') The Prophet
(God bless him and grant him peace) said, "He who establishes family
relations in a city is one of them."1° It is for this reason that the enemy
becomes a Dhimmi. If, however, she decides to move to a town that is
not her hometown, but the marriage took place there, then al-Quduri
71t is recorded by the compilers of all the four Sunan. Al-Zayla'i, vol. 3, 268.
8ft has preceded, for example, in the case where Abü Bakr (God be pleased with him)
delivered the child to the mother. Al-Zayla'i, vol. 3, 269.
91t is recorded by AbU DawUd. Al-Zayla'i, vol. 3, 269.
10 It is recorded by Ibn Abi Shaybah in his Musnad. Such a person is to offer the prayer
of the resident there. Al-Zayla'i, vol. 3, 271.

--- Page 799 ---

BOOK VIII: DIVORCE(cid:9) Al-Hidayah(cid:9) 83
indicates in the Book that she does not have a right to do so. This is the
narration of the Book of Divorce. It is, on the other hand, stated in a!-
Jami' al-Saghir that she does have such a right. The reason is that when
a contract takes place in a certain location, it gives rise to the operation
of the rules there, just like sale gives rise to the delivery of goods at the
place of contract, and among these rights is the right to the custody of
the child. The reasoning underlying the first view is that marriage in a
strange land is not, according to custom, an undertaking to reside there.
This is the correct view. The conclusion is that it is necessary to have both
conditions together, that is, the homeland and the fact that the marriage
took place there.
All this applies when there is between the two towns a sufficient dis-
tance. If the towns are so close by that it is possible for the father to see
his child and then be able to spend the night at his own house, there is no
harm in her moving there. The same response is given for two villages. If
she moves from a village of the city to the city, there is no harm. This is in
consideration of the welfare of the minor so that he can grow up learn-
ing the culture of the city. There is no harm in this for the father. In the
reverse situation there is harm for the minor if he grows up among the
villagers and adopts the habits of the people of the countryside; in such a
case she is not to move to the village.

--- Page 800 ---

84(cid:9) Al-Hidäyah(cid:9) BOOK VIII: DIVORCE

--- Page 801 ---

Chapter 76
Nafaqah (Maintenance)
He said: It is obligatory for the husband to provide maintenance to his
wife whether she is Muslim or an unbeliever, when she is ready to stay at
the residence (to be provided), in which case he is under an obligation
to provide maintenance, clothing and residence. The basis for this are
the words of the Exalted, "Let the man of means spend according to his
means: and the man whose resources are restricted, let him spend accord-
ing to what Allah has given him,"' and His words, "But he (the father
of the child) shall bear the cost of their food and clothing on equitable
112
terms. In addition there is the saying of the Prophet (God bless him
and grant him peace) on the occasion of the Farewell Pilgrimage, "They
have a right over you for their food and clothing according to what is
customary."' Further, maintenance is the compensation for the restraints
placed upon her. Each person who is restricted to meeting obligations
for another is entitled to maintenance. The basis for this is the office of
the qadi and the official in the case of zakdt. In these evidences there are
no details, therefore, the Muslim woman and the unbelieving woman are
equal for this purpose.
In the provision of maintenance the status of both shall be consid-
ered. This feeble servant has to say that this is the investigation of Khassáf
(God be pleased with him) and the fatwa today is upon this. The mean-
ing in detail is that if they are enjoying financial ease, the maintenance of
the well off is to be provided, but if the spouses are in financial straits, the
'Qur'an 65 7
'Qur'an 2: 233
This has preceded as a lengthy tradition from Jabir (God be pleased with him).
3
AI-Zayla'i, vol. 3, 271.
85

--- Page 802 ---

86(cid:9) Al-Hidãyah(cid:9) BOOK VIII: DIVORCE
maintenance of those who are hard up is to be provided. Al-Karkhi (God
bless him) said that the status of the husband alone is to be taken into
account. This is also the view of al-Shãfi'i (God bless him). The basis are
the words of the Exalted, "Let the man of means spend according to his
means."4
The reasoning for the first view is the directive of the Prophet (God
bless him and grant him peace) to Hind the wife of AbU Sufyán, "Take
what is fair from the wealth of your husband what is sufficient for you and
for your child.' 5 In this he considered her status and that is the underlying
fiqh. Maintenance is obligatory in accordance with what is sufficient and
a poor woman does not need the maintenance of those who enjoy finan-
cial ease. Accordingly, the meaning of excess does not apply. As for the
text, we give a ruling according to what it requires and the requirement is
that he is to pay according to what is within his capacity at the time and
the remaining becomes a debt attached to his liability. The meaning of
the word ma'ruf in the text is "the average' and that is obligatory. This
elaborates that there is no meaning in the fixing of the quantity as has
been held by al-Shãfi'i (God bless him) saying that for the well off it is
two mudds, for the person in financial straits it is one mudd, while for
one having reasonable means it is one and one-half mudd. The reason is
that what is made obligatory by way of being adequate does not admit of
quantification according to the shar' (law).
If she refuses to submit herself to her husband until she is paid her
dower, she is still entitled to maintenance, because she refused on the
basis of a right. Thus, the absence of being restrained is due to a cause
that originated with him, therefore, the right is deemed not to have been
lost.
If the woman goes away, she is not entitled to maintenance until she
returns to his house, because the loss of confinement is due to her. If
she returns the confinement will be renewed and maintenance will be
revived. This is distinguished from the situation where she refuses to have
sexual intercourse while remaining in her husband's house as confine-
ment persists and the husband is able to coerce her to have intercourse.6
4Qur'an 65: 7
51t has been recorded by all the sound compilations, except al-Tirmidhi. Al-Zayla'i,
vol. 3, 271.
6This is being considered marital rape today.

--- Page 803 ---

BOOK VIII: DIVORCE(cid:9) Al-Hidayah(cid:9) 87
If she is a minor with whom intercourse is not undertaken, then
there is no maintenance for her, because the denial of cohabitation is due
to a cause found in her. Obligatory confinement is such that it becomes
a means to the entitled purpose through marriage and that is not found
here, as distinguished from the case of a woman who is ill, which we will
elaborate. Al-Shãfi'i (God bless him) said that she is entitled to mainte-
nance for he considers her the subject-matter of ownership as is the case
with an owned slave woman through lawful ownership. We maintain that
the dower paid is compensation for ownership, and two counter-values
cannot be combined for one counter-value, thus, she has dower and not
maintenance.
If the husband is a minor who is not old enough to have intercourse,
while she is grown up, she is entitled to maintenance from his wealth.
The reason is that submission is complete on her part and the inability is
from his side and he is deemed equivalent to the husband with an ampu-
tated organ or one who is impotent.
If a woman is imprisoned for non-payment of a debt, there is no
maintenance for her. The reason is that loss of confinement to the house
is due to her because of the demand by the creditor. If it is not due to her
as when she is unable to pay, the cause is still not due to him. Likewise,
when she is forcefully abducted by a man who flees with her. According to
Abü Yüsuf (God bless him) she is entitled to maintenance, but the fatwa
today is according to the first view. The reason is that the loss of confine-
ment is not due to him so the confinement may be determined to persist.
Likewise if a woman proceeds on hajj with a main-am, because the loss
of confinement to the house is due to her. It is narrated from AbU YUsuf
(God bless him) that she is entitled to maintenance, because undertaking
a definitive obligation amounts to an excuse, however, he is obliged to pay
the maintenance of one resident and not that of one going on a journey,
for she is entitled to that alone. If the husband travels with her for hajj
she is entitled to maintenance by agreement. The reason is that confine-
ment continues with her being in his control, but the maintenance of the
resident is due and not that of one on a journey, nor is rent due on the
basis of what we said.
If she falls ill in the house of the husband, she is entitled to main-
tenance. Analogy dictates that there be no maintenance for her, because
illness prevents intercourse, as there is loss of confinement for purposes
of intercourse. The reasoning underlying istihsãn is that the husband can

--- Page 804 ---

88(cid:9) A1-Hidãyah(cid:9) BOOK VIII: DIVORCE
come close to her and touch her and she looks after the house, and the
prevention is due to an obstacle that is similar to menstruation. Accord-
ing to Abü Yüsuf (God bless him) if she submits herself and thereafter
falls ill, maintenance is obligatory due to the realisation of submission. If,
however, she falls ill and then submits herself, it is not obligatory, because
submission was not sound. The jurists said that this is good (as istihsãn)
and in the Book are statements that indicate this.
The husband, if he is well off, is obliged to pay maintenance for her as
well as for her servant. The meaning here is the elaboration of the main-
tenance of the servant. Consequently, it is stated in some manuscripts, "It
is made obligatory for the husband, if he is well off, to pay the mainte-
nance of her servant." The construction placed on this is that providing
adequately for her is obligatory. Providing for the servant is part of giving
her adequately as it is necessary for her to have one.
Maintenance for more than one servant is not to be made obliga-
tory. This is the view according to Abü lIanifah and Muhammad (God
bless them). AbU Yüsuf (God bless him) said that it is to be made oblig-
atory, because she needs one servant for household chores and another
for dealing with matters outside the house. The two jurists argue that
the same person can look after both tasks, therefore, there is no need for
two persons. The reason is that if he were to meet her needs himself it
would be deemed sufficient, likewise if one person were to stand in his
place. They said that the financially well off husband is obliged to provide
the same maintenance for the servant that a husband in financial straits
provides for his wife, which is the minimum subsistence. His statement
in the Book, "If he is enjoying financial ease," is an indication that there
is no obligation to pay the maintenance of a servant if he is in finan-
cial straits. This is a narration of al-Hasan from Abü Hanifah (God bless
him), which is the correct view as distinguished from what Muhammad
(God bless him) said. The reason is that the obligation upon the hus-
band in financial straits is to pay the minimum subsistence and this is
one where the wife serves herself.
If a person is unable to pay his wife's maintenance, they are not to
be separated rather it will be said to her, "Borrow against the liability of
your husband?' Al-Shãfi'i (God bless him) said that they are to be sep-
arated, because he has failed to retain her in an equitable way. The qãdi
stands in his place in pronouncing the separation, as is the case of the
person with an amputated organ or the impotent person. In fact, this

--- Page 805 ---

Al-Hidãyah(cid:9) 89
BOOK VIII: DIVORCE(cid:9)
case has a higher priority for separation, because maintenance is a much
stronger thing. Our argument is that (by separation) his right stands
annulled and her right is delayed. The first is stronger with respect to
injury, and this (the lesser injury) is so as maintenance becomes a debt
imposed by the qãdi, thus, it can be recovered in the next period. The
loss of a right to wealth is subservient in the case of marriage and is not
attached to what is the main purpose, which is procreation. The benefit of
the instruction to raise a loan, along with judicial support, is that she can
transfer the claim of the creditor to the husband. If, however, the raising
of the loan is without the directive of the qadi, the debt will be claimed
from her and not the husband.
If the qãdi awards her the maintenance of a person in financial
straits, but then he becomes financially well off after which she files a
claim for more, the maintenance of one in financial ease is to be com-
pleted for her. The reason is that maintenance varies with financial ease
and hardship, and what he awarded was maintenance that is not obliga-
tory (now), thus, if the husband's financial status changes, she has a right
to demand her full right.
If the husband does not provide her with maintenance for a cer-
tain period, and she demands this maintenance from him, then there
is nothing for her, unless the qadi had determined maintenance for her
or if she had made a settlement with the husband for part of the past
maintenance, in which case the qadi will award her the past mainte-
nance. The reason is that maintenance is a grant in our view and not a
counter-value, as has preceded, therefore, the obligation is not strength-
ened except through adjudication. It is just like a gift, which does not
become obligatory except by a strengthening factor and that is posses-
sion. Settlement (sulh) has the same status as adjudication, because his
authority over himself is stronger than the authority of the qädi over him.
This is distinguished from dower, which is a counter-value.
If the husband dies after an award of maintenance is pronounced
against him, and several months pass, the claim of maintenance lapses.
Likewise if the wife dies. The reason is that maintenance is a grant and
grants lapse on account of death, just as a gift becomes void with death
prior to taking possession. Al-Shãfi'i (God bless him) said that it is con-
verted into a debt prior to adjudication and is not extinguished because
of death. The reason is that it is a counter-value in his view, and is to be

--- Page 806 ---

90(cid:9) A1-Hidayah(cid:9) BOOK VIII: DIVORCE
treated like all other debts. The response to this we have already elabo-
rated.
If he grants her in advance the maintenance of a year, that is, hastens
payment, and thereafter dies, nothing is to be recovered from her. This
is the view according to AbU Hanifah and AbU Yüsuf (God bless them).
Muhammad (God bless him) said that the maintenance of the period
that has passed is to be calculated and the remainder is to be credited
to the (estate of the) husband. This is also the view upheld by al-Shãfi'i
(God bless him). The same disagreement governs clothing, because the
wife has hastened it as a counter-value in conformity with what is due
to her as a result of confinement to the house. The entitlement stands
annulled due to death, therefore, the counter-value is diminished in the
same ratio, just like the subsistence paid to the qadI and the grants made
to the fighters. The two jurists argue that it is a grant and it is followed
by possession. There is no recovery of grants after death as their hukm
(legal effect) stands terminated, as in the case of a gift. Consequently, if
the maintenance is lost without having been consumed by the woman,
it is not to be recovered from her on the basis of consensus (ijmã'). It is
related from Muhammad (God bless him) that if she takes possession of
the maintenance of a month or what is less nothing is to be recovered
from her as it is insignificant and takes the rule of what is consumed
currently.
If a slave marries a freewoman then her maintenance becomes a debt
for which he can be sold. The meaning is that if he marries her with the
permission of the master. The reason is that it is a debt that becomes
obligatory as his liability due to the existence of its cause. Its existence
becomes evident with respect to the master, therefore, it becomes linked
to his slave like the debt of trade in relation to the slave authorised to
trade. It is up to him to ransom him with payment, because the wife's
right is attached to maintenance and not to the corpus of the slave. If the
slave dies, the claim is extinguished. Likewise if he is killed according to
the authentic narration, because it was a grant (and not a debt).
If a freeman marries a slave woman and her master lets her stay
with him at his house, then he is liable for maintenance, because con-
finement to the house stands realised. If he does not permit her to stay
with the husband then there is no maintenance, due to the absence of
confinement. Permission to stay with the husband is where he leaves her
alone at the husband's residence and does not employ her for services. If

--- Page 807 ---

BOOK VIII: DIVORCE(cid:9) Al-Hidãyah(cid:9) 91
he employs her after letting her stay there, maintenance is extinguished,
because confinement is lost. Letting her stay exclusively with the husband
is not binding on him in the case of marriage, as has preceded. If, how-
ever, the woman serves the master occasionally without his employing
her, maintenance is not extinguished for he did not employ her so as to
amount to her return. The mudabbarah (to be set free upon the death of
the master) and the slave mother are like the married slave woman in this
respect. Allah, the Exalted, knows what is correct.
76.1 RIGHT TO RESIDENCE
It is the liability of the husband to make her reside in an independent
house in which there is no one else who belongs to his family, unless
she chooses that herself. The reason is that residence is part of what
is deemed adequate for her, therefore, it is obligatory like maintenance.
Accordingly, Allah has made it obligatory along with maintenance. If the
Almighty has made it obligatory as her right, then he has no right to
make her share it with another. The reason is that such sharing is injuri-
ous for her as she cannot be carefree about her things, it prevents her free
interaction with her husband as well as from cohabitation. The exception
is where the woman chooses this herself for then she is agreeing to the
reduction of her rights.
If he has a child from another, the husband does not have the right
to make it reside with her, due to what we have elaborated. If he makes
her reside in a room within a house, where it can be closed it would be
sufficient as the purpose has been achieved.
He has a right to prevent her parents, children from another man,
and her relatives from visiting her in her house. The reason is that the
residence is in his ownership and he has a right to prevent entry into
his property. He is not to prevent them (her relatives) from looking at
her and to speak to her at any time they choose, as that will amount to
the severing of the womb. In letting them do so there is no injury being
caused to him. It is said that he is not to prevent them from visiting her or
speaking to her, but he may prevent them from staying on and constant
presence, because their prolonged stay and speech is detrimental. It is also
said that he is not to prevent her from going out to visit her parents nor to
prevent them from visiting her each Friday. In the case of other persons,
the number is linked to one year.

--- Page 808 ---

92(cid:9) Al-Hidayah(cid:9) BOOK VIII: DIVORCE
If the husband disappears and he has wealth that is in possession
of another, who acknowledges it as well as the marriage contract, the
qMi is to award maintenance from this wealth for the wife of the miss-
ing husband, the minor children and his parents. Likewise if it is in the
knowledge of the qãdi even though the man (in possession) denies it.
The reason is that when he acknowledged the existence of marriage as
well as the deposit, he acknowledged that she is entitled to take it, because
she has a right to take from the wealth of her husband without his con-
sent. The acknowledgement of the person in possession is admissible
against him (the husband), especially in this case. If he denies either of the
two facts, the testimony of the woman will not be admissible against him
(the custodian), because the custodian is not a party in the issue of estab-
lishing the relationship of marriage against him nor is the woman a party
in proving the rights of the person missing. If this (marriage) is estab-
lished in his case, the proof will also operate against the missing person.
Likewise if the wealth in his possession is held by way of mudãrabah. The
same response is given in the case of a debt. All this applies if the wealth
is of a type that can be claimed through her right, like dinars, dirhams,
food or clothing that is suitable for her right. If, however, the wealth is of
another species, maintenance is not to be awarded as for that he will need
to sell the goods, and the wealth of the missing person cannot be sold by
agreement. In fact, according to Abü Hanifah (God bless him) it cannot
be sold even in the case of one present, therefore, the same applies to one
absent. As for the two jurists, the reason is that he adjudicates against the
person present when he is denying it, but he cannot adjudicate against a
person absent for he does not know whether he is denying it.
He said: He is to take a surety from her for the amount paid, in the
interest of the person absent, because it is possible that she has already
taken the maintenance or her husband has divorced her and her waiting
period is over. He (the Author) distinguished between this case and the
case of the inheritance when it is divided between the heirs in the presence
of witnesses (confirming them as heirs) and they have not said that they
know of another heir. In such a case a surety is not obtained according to
Abü HanIfah (God bless him). The reason is that in this case the person
for whom surety is taken is unknown, while in this case he is known, and
it is the husband. She is also required to take the oath by Allah for what
she is paid to preserve the interest of the missing person.

--- Page 809 ---

BOOK VIII: DIVORCE(cid:9) Al-Hidäyah(cid:9) 93
He said: He (the qtdI)is not to award from the wealth of the missing
person, except to these persons. The distinction is that the maintenance
of these persons becomes due prior to the award by the qadi, therefore,
they have the right to take prior to adjudication by the qadi. It is as if
the award of the qadi is additional support for them. As for other near
relatives, their maintenance becomes due through the award of the qadi
as it is a matter that is subject to ijtihãd, and passing a judgement against
a person who is absent is not permitted.
If the qadi is not aware of her being his wife, when the person hold-
ing the wealth does not acknowledge it either, and she brings witnesses to
prove she is his wife, or if he has not left any wealth and she brings wit-
nesses to prove marriage so that the qadi may award maintenance against
the missing person and direct her to raise a loan for the purpose, then
the qãdi is not to adjudicate all this, because it amounts to adjudicating
against a missing person. Zufar (God bless him) said that he is to adju-
dicate this matter as it is for the preservation of her interest, while there
is no injury in this to the interest of the missing person. If he were to
reappear and affirm what she has claimed, she will have taken her right.
If he denies it, he will be made to take the oath, and if he refuses he will
be affirming her claim. If she were to bring witnesses, her right would be
established, but if she is unable to do so the surety or the woman will be
held liable. Today, the qadis act upon this. The qadi awards maintenance
against the missing person due to the need of the people, and this is a
matter that is subject to ijtihãd. On this issue there are other opinions too
that have been withdrawn, therefore, these are not mentioned.
76.2 DIVORCEES, WIDOWS AND OTHER CASES
If a man divorces his wife, then she has maintenance and residence
during her waiting period whether the divorce is revocable or irrevo-
cable. A1-Shãfi'i (God bless him) said that there is no maintenance for
the woman separated irrevocably, unless she is pregnant. As for the one
whose divorce is revocable, her nikãh still continues, especially in our
view, for it is lawful for him to have sexual intercourse with her. As for one
whose divorce is irrevocable, the reasoning underlying his view is based
upon what is reported from Fãtimah bint Qays, who said, "My husband
divorced me thrice, and the Messenger of Allah (God bless him and grant

--- Page 810 ---

94(cid:9) Al-Hidayah(cid:9) BOOK VIII: DIVORCE
him peace) did not award me residence or maintenance."7 Further, he
has no rights of ownership with respect to her, and maintenance is based
upon ownership. It is for this reason that maintenance is not obligatory
for the woman whose husband has died due to the lack of ownership.
This is distinguished from the case where she is pregnant, because that
we have identified through the text, which in the words of the Exalted
is, "And if they are pregnant, then spend (your substance) on them until
they deliver their burden." 8 Our argument is that maintenance is in lieu of
confinement to the house, as we have mentioned, and confinement sub-
sists with respect to the main purpose of nikãh, which is procreation. As
the waiting period is obligatory for the preservation of progeny, it leads to
the obligation of maintenance due to which she has residence too on the
basis of consensus (ijmã'). It is as if she has become pregnant. The tra-
dition of Fãtimah bint Qays was rejected by 'Umar (God be pleased with
him). Thus, he said: "We will not cast aside the Book of our Lord nor the
Sun nah of our Prophet for the statement of a woman about whom we
do not know whether she is telling the truth or is lying, has retained it in
memory or forgotten. I heard the Messenger of Allah (God bless him and
grant him peace) saying, 'For the woman divorced thrice is maintenance
and residence as long as she is in her waiting period? " Her tradition was
also rejected by Zayd ibn Thãbit, Usãmah ibn Zayd, Jabir and 'A'ishah
(God be pleased with them all).
There is no maintenance for the woman whose husband has died.
The reason is that her confinement is not due to the right of the husband
rather it is due to the right of the law (shar'), and her staying confined is
worship on her part. Do you not see that identification of the vacation of
the womb is not taken into account in this so that taking note of men-
struation is not stipulated in her case. Accordingly, maintenance is not
made obligatory for her. Further, maintenance becomes due in phases,
and he has no ownership after death, thus, it cannot be imposed on the
ownership of the heirs.
In the case of each separation that occurs due to an offensive act of
the woman, like apostasy or kissing the son of the husband (stepson),
there is no maintenance for her. The reason is that she has confined
7ft is recorded by all the sound compilations, except al-Bukhãri. Al-Zayla'i, vol. 31
272.
8Qur'an 65 : 6
91t is also reported by others and is recorded by Muslim. A1-Zayla'i, vol. 3, 273.

--- Page 811 ---

BOOK VIII: DIVORCE(cid:9) A1-Hidayah(cid:9) 95
herself without lawful right, and it is as if she has become rebellious.
This is distinguished from the case of dower after consummation of mar-
riage, because submission is found through intercourse in lieu of dower.
It is also distinguished from the case where separation has occurred on
account of her, but without an offence, like the option of emancipation
or the option of puberty as well as separation due to lack of proportional
status. The reason is that in such a case she has confined herself due to a
right, and such a case does not extinguish maintenance, like the situation
where she keeps herself confined for obtaining her dower.
If he divorces her thrice and then, God forbid, she becomes an apos-
tate, her maintenance is extinguished, but if she lets the son of her
husband have physical access to her, she is entitled to maintenance. The
meaning here is that she lets him have access to her after divorce, because
separation occurs due to the three repudiations. Apostasy and and phys-
ical involvement have no operation in this case, except that the apostate
female is kept in confinement till she repents. There is no maintenance
for one confined, and one who has physical contact is not kept in con-
finement. It is for these reasons that the distinction is found.
76.3 MAINTENANCE OF MINOR CHILDREN
The maintenance of minor children is the liability of the father and no
one else participates in this with him, just like no one else participates
with him in the maintenance of the wife. This is due to the words of the
Exalted, "But he (the father of the child) shall bear the cost of their food
and clothing on equitable terms."" The mawlüd laI-zü is the father.
If the child is breast-fed, then the mother is not obliged to breast-feed
him, due to what we elaborated that adequate subsistence is the liability
of the father. The wages of breast-feeding are like maintenance. Further,
the reason is that she is probably not able to do so due to an inability
found in her, therefore, compelling her to do so has no meaning. It is
said in the interpretation of the words of the Exalted, "No mother shall
be treated unfairly on account of her child,"" that she is obliged to do so
despite her reluctance. This is what we have mentioned as an elaboration
of the rule, which means that if someone is found who will breast-feed
'°Qur'an 2: 233
"Qur'an 2: 233

--- Page 812 ---

96(cid:9) Al-Hidãyah(cid:9) BOOK VIII: DIVORCE
the child. If, however, no one is found to feed the child, the mother is to
be compelled to feed the child for the survival of the child and its loss.
He said: The father is to hire the woman who will feed the child where
the mother is. As for the hiring by the father, it is so because hiring is
his duty. His statement "where the mother is" means if she so desires as
bringing up the child is her responsibility.
If he hires her to feed his child when she is his wife or one who is
undergoing the waiting period on account of him, then this is not valid.
The reason is that feeding is her moral obligation. Allah, the Exalted, has
said, "The mothers shall give suck to their offspring,"" unless she offers
an excuse due to the possibility of her inability. If she undertakes it for
wages, her ability to do so becomes apparent when the act is obligatory
upon her. Thus, taking wages for such an act is not permitted. In the case
of a woman undergoing the waiting period after a revocable divorce, this
is the position according to a unanimous narration (from our jurists),
because the marriage subsists. Likewise there is one narration about the
woman separated irrevocably. In another narration it is said that hiring
her is valid, because the marriage stands dissolved. The reasoning of the
first narration is that the marriage subsists for purposes of some ahkãm.13
If he hires her when she is still married to him or is in the waiting
period for feeding a child of his from another woman, it is valid, because
it is not part of her duties. If her waiting period is over and then he hires
her, that is, for the feeding of his child it is valid, because the marriage is
dissolved in all respects and she is now like a stranger.
If the father says: "I will not hire her (the mother) and brings
another woman, but then the mother agrees on similar wages or without
wages, then she has a greater right to feed the child. The reason is that
she has more love for the child and the welfare of the child requires that
he be given to her (for nursing). If, however, she demands higher wages,
the father is not to be compelled to hire her, in order to avoid loss to the
father. It is this that has been indicated by the words of the Exalted, "No
mother shall be treated unfairly on account of her child, nor the father on
account of his child"4 that is, by making it binding upon him to accept
her on wages higher than those of a stranger.
"Qur'an 2: 233
13Which are the waiting period and the obligation of providing residence.
14Qur'an 2: 233

--- Page 813 ---

BOOK VIII: DIVORCE(cid:9) Al-Hidayah(cid:9) 97
The maintenance of a minor is obligatory upon the father even if
he differs from him with respect to religion just like the maintenance of
the wife is obligatory upon the husband even if she professes a different
faith. As for the child, it is due to the unqualified meaning of what we
have recited. Further, he is a part of him and is like himself in meaning.
As for the wife, the basis is that the cause is the valid contract of marriage
and because maintenance is in lieu of confinement, which has been estab-
lished through the valid contract. The contract between a Muslim man
and an unbelieving woman is valid giving rise to confinement, therefore,
maintenance becomes obligatory.
In all the cases that we have mentioned, maintenance is obligatory
upon the father where the minor does not have wealth of his own. If,
however, he does have wealth then the rule is that the maintenance of a
human being is from his own wealth whether he is a minor or a major.
76.4 MAINTENANCE FOR PARENTS AND GRANDPARENTS
A man is under an obligation to spend on his parents, his grandfathers
and grandmothers, if they are poor, even if they profess a different faith.
As for the parents, it is based upon the words of the Exalted, "Bear them
company in this life with justice (and consideration)."15 The verse was
revealed in the case of unbelieving parents. It is not part of justice and
fairness to live enjoying the blessings of Allah and to leave them to die of
hunger. Likewise for the grandfathers and grandmothers for they too are
like fathers and mothers. It is for this reason that the grandfather stands in
the place of the father at the latter's death. Further, they were the cause of
his life and that gives rise to their survival with the same status as parents.
Poverty is stipulated, however, as the possession of wealth lends greater
priority to the obligation of maintenance from their own wealth as com-
pared to its obligation from the wealth of another. Maintenance is not
prevented due to a difference in religion on the basis of what we have
recited.
Maintenance does not become obligatory with a difference in reli-
gion, except for the wife, parents, grandfathers, grandmothers, children
and grandchildren. As for the mother it is due to what we have recited
15 Qur'an 31: 15

--- Page 814 ---

98(cid:9) Al-Hidayah(cid:9) BOOK VIII: DIVORCE
and that it is obligatory due to a valid contract that leads to her confine-
ment as a duty that has a purpose. All this is not related to a common
religion. As for the others, because being a part is established and the
part of a man is like the man himself, just as it does not prevent spending
on himself due to his unbelief, it does not prevent the maintenance of his
part. The exception is that if they are the enemy, their maintenance is not
obligatory on a Muslim even when they have come over on safe-custody
(amãn). The reason is that we have been prohibited to be kind to those
who fight with us due to our din.
The Christian is under no obligation to provide maintenance for his
Muslim brother, likewise a Muslim is under no obligation to provide
maintenance for his Christian brother. The reason is that maintenance
is linked to inheritance by the text as distinguished from manumission
through ownership for it is annulled due to kinship and being in the pro-
hibited degree of marriage on the basis of a tradition." Further, kinship
gives rise to a bond that is further strengthened with the similarity of reli-
gion. The continued ownership (of relatives) is stronger in cutting off the
bonds of the womb than the non-payment of maintenance. Accordingly,
we have adopted for what is stronger the true underlying cause ('illah),
and in the case of the lesser case the 'illah that strengthens. It is for this
reason that the distinction is made.
No one is to participate with the child in the provision of mainte-
nance for his parents. The reason is that they have priority in the wealth
of the child on the basis of a text, while they do not have such priority in
the wealth of another, and also because the child is the closest person to
them, thus, he is the first from whom their maintenance is claimed. The
obligation falls equally upon the males and females according to the most
authentic narration (zãhir al-riwayah), which is correct as the meaning
includes both.
Maintenance is due for each relative within the prohibited degree of
marriage if such relative is a poor minor, or is a poor major woman or
is a major male who is poor and has a chronic illness or is blind. The
reason is that maintaining the bond of the womb is obligatory in the case
of close relatives and not distant relatives, and the distinguishing factor
is that they be in the prohibited degree of marriage. Allah, the Exalted,
'61t is recorded by al-Nasä'i to the effect that whoever comes to own a relative in the
prohibited degree of marriage, such relative is set free on his account. Al-'Ayni, vol. 5,
702.

--- Page 815 ---

BOOK VIII: DIVORCE(cid:9) Al-Hidtyah(cid:9) 99
has said, "An heir shall be chargeable in the same way."17 In the recitation
of 'Abd Allah ibn Mas'Ud (God be pleased with him), 'An heir within
the prohibited degree of marriage shall be chargeable in the same way."
Thereafter, it is necessary that attributes like need, minority, and being a
female be found. Chronic illness and blindness are signs of need due to
the existence of the inability. One who is able to earn is well off due to
his earning as distinguished from the parents as the labour of earning is
linked with them. The child is commanded to eliminate injury to them,
therefore, maintenance is made obligatory despite their ability to earn.
The share of maintenance is in proportion to the share of inheritance
and the person will be compelled to pay it. The reason is that mentioning
the heir in the text is an indication for considering the (share in) inher-
itance. Further, liability is in proportion to revenue, while compelling is
for the satisfaction of the right of one to whom it is due.
The maintenance of a major daughter and a son, who is chronically
ill, is upon the parents in thirds: on the father is two-thirds and on the
mother one-third. The reason is that inheritance is due to them in this
proportion. This feeble servant says: This is what is related through the
narration of al-Khassãf and al-Hasan (God bless them). In the Zãhir a!-
Riwãyah the entire liability is that of the father due to the words of the
Exalted, "But he (the father of the child) shall bear the cost of their food
and clothing on equitable terms."" Here the chronically ill is like a minor
child. The distinction on the basis of the first narration is that the author-
ity of wilãyah and the burden of support are gathered in the father so
much so that he is liable for his sadaqat al-fitr (amount due on Id al-fitr),
therefore, maintenance is also made specific to him. The major child is
not like them due to the lack of wilãya/i in his case, therefore, the mother
participates in this with him. For persons other than the father, the ratio
of inheritance is taken into account, so that the maintenance of the minor
is upon the mother and the grandfather in thirds, while the maintenance
of the brother in financial straits is upon various sisters who are well off in
fifths in accordance with inheritance, except that what is considered is the
eligibility for inheritance on the whole and not its actual disbursement.
Thus, if the person in financial straits has a maternal uncle and the son of
17 Qur'an 2 : 233
18 Qur'an 2: 233

--- Page 816 ---

100(cid:9) Al-Hidãyah(cid:9) BOOK VIII: DIVORCE
a paternal uncle, his maintenance is upon the maternal uncle, while his
inheritance goes to the son of the paternal uncle.
Their maintenance (close relatives) is not due when there is a differ-
ence of faith, due to the annulment of the legal capacity for inheritance
as that must be taken into account.
Maintenance is not obligatory on the poor man, because it is made
obligatory for strengthening the bonds of the womb and he is entitled to it
himself so how can the obligation be demanded from him? This is distin-
guished from the maintenance of the wife and his minor child, because he
made it binding upon himself by going ahead with the contract, because
interests are not secured without it, and in such a case difficult finan-
cial straits do not operate. Thereafter, financial ease is determined on the
basis of the nisãb, according to what is narrated from AbU Yüsuf (God
bless him). According to Muhammad (God bless him) it is determined by
what is in excess of maintenance for himself and his family for a month
or by what is surplus over this through his permanent and daily earning.
The reason is that what is taken into account in the case of the rights of
individuals is the ability and not the nisãb, as that is for financial ease. The
fatwa today is on the first view where the nisãb is the nisãb that prevents
sadaqah (payment of zakãt).
If the missing son has wealth, the maintenance for the parents is to
be awarded from it, and we have already elaborated the reasoning under-
lying this.
If his father sells his goods to recover his maintenance, it is permit-
ted, according to Abü Hanifah (God bless him), and this is based upon
istihsãn. If he sells his immovable property, it is not permitted. In the
opinion of the two jurists, it is not permitted to sell such property, and
this is based upon qiyas. The reason is that he has no authority (wilãyah)
over him as it was terminated on the son's attaining puberty, therefore, he
does not possess such authority even during his presence. Consequently,
he does not possess the authority to sell for any kind of debt except that
of maintenance. Likewise, the mother does not possess such authority.
According to Abü Hanifah (God bless him), the father has the author-
ity to preserve his son's wealth when he is missing. Do you not see that
the wasi has such authority, therefore, the father has greater priority for
such authority due to the bond of affection. The sale of movable property
falls within the authority of preservation, but immovable property is not
like this as it stands protected on its own. This is distinguished from the

--- Page 817 ---

BOOK VIII: DIVORCE(cid:9) Al-Hidayah(cid:9) 101
case of relatives other than the father, for they have no authority at all
to undertake transactions for him during his minority nor do they have
authority of preservation after his majority. If the sale by the father is
permitted and the price is of a species that is suitable for his right, which
is his maintenance, he has a right to recover it from the price. It is just
like selling the movable and immovable property for the minor, which is
permitted due to complete wilãyah, and then recovering his maintenance
from it as it is a species compatible with his right.
If the parents hold wealth belonging to the missing son and they
spend on themselves from it, they are not to be held liable for com-
pensation, because they have satisfied their claim as their maintenance
becomes obligatory prior to adjudication, as has preceded. They have
taken a species compatible with their right.
If a stranger holds his wealth and he pays their maintenance with-
out the permission of the qadi, he is held liable. The reason is that he
has undertaken a transaction in the wealth of another without author-
ity, because he is a deputy merely for safe-custody of the wealth. This is
distinguished from the case where the qadi orders him to do so, as his
directive is binding due to his general authority. When he is held liable,
he cannot have recourse to the person who took possession of the wealth,
as he came to own it through damãn and it is as if he made a donation.
Where the qadi makes an award of maintenance for the child, par-
ents, and the next of kin, and a certain period passes over such award,
it lapses. The reason is that the maintenance of these persons becomes
obligatory to meet a need and is not due when financial ease exists, and
such ease is found with the passage of time. This is distinguished from
the maintenance of the wife, when the qãdi makes an award, because that
is obligatory even with financial ease, and is not extinguished with the
attainment of financial ease in the past days.
The exception is where the qadi has allowed (the relatives) to raise a
loan in the person's name. The reason is that the qadi has general author-
ity and his order becomes the order of the missing person, thus, the debt
becomes his liability that does not lapse with the passage of time. Allah,
the Exalted, knows what is correct.

--- Page 818 ---

102(cid:9) Al-Hidãyah(cid:9) BOOK VIII: DIVORCE
76.5
MAINTENANCE FOR SLAVES
The master is under an obligation to spend for the maintenance of his
slave woman and male slave, due to the words of the Prophet (God bless
him and grant him peace) about slaves, "They are your brothers whom
Allah, the Exalted, has made to fall under your authority. Feed them out
of what you eat and clothe them out of what you wear, and do not tor-
ment the servants of Allah."9
If he refuses to do so and they have a means of earning, they should
earn and spend on themselves, because in this is the securing of the inter-
ests of both sides, as it will keep the owned slave alive and remain within
the ownership of the master.
If they do not have a means of earning like a slave who is chronically
ill or a slave girl whose services are usually not let out on hire then the
master will be compelled to sell them. The reason is that they are eligi-
ble for maintenance, and in their sale is the satisfaction of their right as
well as the survival of the right of the master by substitution (the price).
This is distinguished from the maintenance of the wife as that becomes a
debt that can be delayed. The maintenance of the slaves does not become
a debt, and is annulled. It is also distinguished from the remaining ani-
mal species, because they are not eligible for maintenance, therefore, the
owner cannot be compelled to spend on them, except that he has been
ordered to do so with respect to what is between him and Allah, the
Exalted. The reason is that the Prophet (God bless him and grant him
peace) has prohibited the tormenting of animals, and this occurs by not
spending on them. He also forbade the wasting of wealth, and by not
spending leads to the wasting of animals. It is narrated from Abü Yüsuf
(God bless him) that the owner is to be compelled, however, the correct
view is the one we have stated. Allah knows best.
1t is recorded by al-Bukhäri and Muslim. A1-Zayla'i, vol. 3, 276.
19

--- Page 819 ---

Al- Hidãyah
BOOK NINE
Atãq
(Emancipation)
Ch. 77: The Legal Status of Emancipation(cid:9) 105
Sec. 1: Slave Relatives(cid:9) in
Ch. 78: Partial Emancipation(cid:9) 115
Ch. 79: Emancipating One of Several Slaves(cid:9) 127
(cid:9)
Ch. 80: Oath of Emancipation 133
Ch. 81: Emancipation Through Ju'alah (cid:9) 137
Ch. 82: Emancipation Upon Death of Owner (Tadbir) (cid:9) 141
Ch. 83: Emancipating the Slave Mother (cid:9) 145

--- Page 820 ---

104(cid:9) Al-Hidayah(cid:9) BOOK IX: EMANCIPATION

--- Page 821 ---

Chapter 7
The Legal Status of Emancipation
Emancipation is a transaction that is recommended. The Prophet (God
bless him and grant him peace) said, "If any Muslim emancipates a
believer, Allah will protect from the Fire each limb of his for each limb of
the person set free?" It is for this reason that they deemed recommended
that a man emancipate a male slave, and a woman set free a female slave
so that the comparison of limb for limb may be realised.
The Author (God be pleased with him) said: Emancipation is valid on
the part of a freeman, who is major and sane, with respect to his own-
ership. Freedom is stipulated, because emancipation is not valid except
where ownership is found, and owned slaves cannot own. Majority is
stipulated, because a minor does not possess legal capacity for the trans-
action as it amounts to a manifest loss, and for this reason the wall does
not have such authority over him. Sanity is stipulated as the insane per-
son does not have legal capacity. Accordingly, if a person who has attained
puberty were to say, "I emancipated him when I was a minor?' his state-
ment will be followed. Likewise if a person who emancipated were to say,
"I emancipated him when I was insane?" where his insanity was manifest,
and factors existed that negated the likelihood of emancipation. Similarly,
if a minor were to say, "Every slave that I own will be free when I attain
puberty?' it is not valid, because he does not have the capacity to issue
a binding statement. It is essential that the slave be in the ownership of
the emancipating person, thus, if he were to emancipate another person's
slave such emancipation will not be executed, due to the words of the
'It has been recorded by all the six sound compilations. A1-Zayla'i, vol. 3, 277.
105

--- Page 822 ---

io6(cid:9) Al-Hidayah(cid:9) BOOK IX: EMANCIPATION
Prophet (God bless him and grant him peace), "There is no emancipa-
tion where one does not own a human being.' 12
If a person says to his male slave or to his female slave, "You are free:'
or "You are emancipated:' or "You are liberated" or "You are released"
or "I have set you free," or "I have emancipated you," then he has eman-
cipated the slave whether or not he had intended emancipation. The
reason is that these words are explicit in the meaning of emancipation as
they are employed in the law and in practice for the purpose. Accordingly,
the need for intention is eliminated. These forms even when they are
meant as reports are employed for the creation of rights in legal transac-
tions on the basis of need, as is the case in divorce, sale and other matters.
If he says that he meant thereby a false report or meant that he is
released from work, he is to be deemed truthful morally (not legally), as
such meaning is probable but he is not deemed truthful legally, because
the intention opposes the apparent meaning.
If he were to say to him, "0 Freeman:' or "0 Emancipated One:' the
slave is emancipated. The reason is that it amounts to calling someone
by a name that is explicit as it amounts to summoning the person called
with the specific description mentioned. This is the actual application.
It requires the realisation of the attribute in him and is established from
his side. By proving it he requires its verification, and we shall repeat this
in what follows, God, the Exalted, willing. The exception is where he has
named him Freeman and then calls him by that name, because the pur-
pose is naming with his proper name, which is the title he has given him.
If he calls him in Persian saying, "0 Azad," where he has given him the
name Hurr, the jurists maintain that he stands emancipated. Likewise, the
opposite, because it does not amount to calling him by his proper name,
thus, it will be considered to mean a report about an attribute (freedom).
Likewise if he says, "Your head is free," "Your face is free:' "Your neck
is free:' or "Your body is free:' or he says to his female slave, "Your vagina
is free?' The reason is that these words are employed to express the mean-
ing of the entire body, and the discussion has preceded in the Book of
Divorce.
If he associates emancipation with an undivided part (percentage),
it applies to that part (and thereafter extends to the whole), and the dis-
agreement about this will be coming up God, the Exalted, willing. If,
2 1t has been recorded by Abü DãwUd and al-Tirmidhi. A1-Zayla'i, vol. 3, 278.

--- Page 823 ---

BOOK IX: EMANCIPATION(cid:9) Al-Hidayah(cid:9) 107
however, he associates it with a specific limb, which does not imply the
entire body, like the hand or foot, emancipation does not take place in our
view, with which al-Shãfi'i disagrees, and the discussion has preceded in
the Book of Divorce where we elaborated it.
If he were to say, "I do not own you:' intending emancipation
thereby, the slave is emancipated, but if he did not intend it he is not
emancipated. The reason is that it is probable that he intended, "I do not
own you for I have sold you:' or he intended, "I do not own you for I
have emancipated you." One of these cannot be identified except through
intention.
He (God be pleased with him) said: The same applies to kinjat with
respect to emancipation. The examples are like his saying, "You have
moved out of my ownership:' "I have no hold over you:' "I have no claim
of slavery over you:' and "I have moved out of your way:' for this implies
the negation of a hold over him. Moving out of ownership or moving out
of the way are probable in the same way for sale and kitãbah as they are
for emancipation, therefore, intention is necessary. Likewise his saying to
his female slave, "I have let you go' because it is the same as saying, "I
have moved out of your way' and this is narrated from Abü Yüsuf (God
bless him) as distinguished from the words, "I have divorced you' which
we will explain in what follows God, the Exalted, willing.
If he were to say, "I have no authority over you," intending emanci-
pation thereby, the slave is not emancipated. The reason is that the word
sultan (authority) is an expression for control, and the ruler has been
called sultan due to his control over the kingdom. Ownership remains
even with loss of control as in the case of the mukatab slave. This is dis-
tinguished from the words "I have no hold over you," because its negation
in absolute terms is through the negation of ownership. The reason is that
the master has a hold over the mukãtab, therefore, it implies emancipa-
tion.
If the master says, "This is my son," and persists in this, the slave is
emancipated. The meaning of this issue is that if one like him (of his age)
gives birth to one like him (of his age), but if he does not, then the issue
is discussed (by al-QudUri) after this. Thereafter, if the slave does not
have a known ancestry, his paternity will be attributed to him, because
the authority of claiming on the basis of ownership is established and the
slave is in need of paternity, therefore, his paternity is attributed to him.
Accordingly, his emancipation is established for he is linking paternity

--- Page 824 ---

io8(cid:9) Al-Hidayah(cid:9) BOOK IX: EMANCIPATION
to the time of conception. If the slave has a well known parentage, his
paternity is not established due to the impossibility of this being true,
but he is emancipated by acting on the statement in its figurative meaning
due to the difficulty of acting upon the actual meaning. The meanings of
figurative use will be mentioned by us God, the Exalted, willing.
If he says, "He is my client (mawlã)' or "0 my client:' the slave is
emancipated. As for the first, the term mawla even though it includes
the meanings of "helper:' "paternal uncle's son:' "authorities in religion,"
"superior and subordinate in emancipation" yet the subordinate is iden-
tified here and becomes like a proper name for him. The reason is that
the master is usually not given help by his owned slaves, and the pater-
nity of the slave is well known, therefore, the first meaning is eliminated.
The second and the third are a type of figurative use when the statement
requires actual application. Attributing the meaning to the slave negates
his being the emancipator, therefore, the meaning of the subordinate
mawlã is identified and linked to an explicit meaning. Likewise if he says
to his female slave, "She is my client," on the basis of what we have said.
If he says that I intended thereby mawlã with respect to religion or that
he made a false statement, his statement will be deemed truthful for what
is between him and Allah the Exalted. He will not be deemed truthful for
purposes of adjudication as it opposes the apparent meaning. As for the
second, when the subordinate was identified as the intended meaning it
became attached to the explicit meaning, and calling by an explicit word
leads to emancipation, as if he had said, "0 Freeman" or "0 Liberated
Man." Likewise, calling with this word. Zufar (God bless him) said that
he is not set free through the second meaning as he intended respect like
saying "0 my master" or "0 my owner." We would say that the statement
is used in its actual meaning and it has become possible to act upon it in
distinction from what he has said, because there is nothing in it that is
specific to emancipation and is, therefore, mere respect.
If he were to say, "0 my son" or "0 my brother' the slave is not
emancipated. The reason is that a call is to alert the one called, except
that when it is through an attribute that is possible for the one calling to
affirm on his part, it will be for the affirmation of that attribute in the
one called, so that he can be made to come with that specific attribute,
as was the case with the statement, "0 hurr," as we elaborated. When
the call is made through an attribute that is not possible for the caller
to affirm from his side, it is merely a name without the affirmation of

--- Page 825 ---

BOOK IX: EMANCIPATION(cid:9) Al-Hidãyah(cid:9) 109
that attribute in that person due to the obstacle in the way. Sonship is
not established by calling him so, for if he was created with the sperm of
another he cannot be his son through such a call, therefore, it is merely
for identification through a name. It is narrated from Abü Hanifah (God
bless him) through an isolated report that the addressee is set free with
these statements, but the reliance is on the authentic narration.
If he says, "0 son:' the slave is not emancipated, because the truth
is as he has stated that the slave is the son of his father. Likewise, if he
says, "0 small son" or "0 small daughter," The reason is that this is
the diminutive form of son and daughter without attributing them to
himself, and the matter is as he has stated.
If he says about a male slave, who cannot be born of him, "This is
my son' he is emancipated according to AbU Hanifah (God bless him).
The two jurists said that he is not emancipated and that is the opinion
of al-Shãfi'i (God bless him) as well. These jurists argue that this state-
ment is meaningless in its true application, therefore, it is to be rejected
and deemed redundant. It is like his saying, "I set you free prior to my
being created, or your being created." According to Abü Hanifah (God
bless him), though this statement in its actual application cannot be given
meaning, it can be given meaning in its figurative sense, because it is a
report about his freedom from the time he came to own him. The rea-
son is that sonship in the case of slaves is a cause for their freedom either
by way of consensus or due to the bond of kinship. Using the cause and
thereby intending the effect in the figurative sense is permitted in usage.
Further, freedom coexists with (is dependent upon) sonship in the case of
slaves. Expressing a similarity through a dependent attribute is one way
of intending the figurative meaning, as has been known, therefore, it is
to be construed in such meaning in order to avoid redundancy. This is
different from the case that the jurists have presented as there is no possi-
bility of the figurative meaning in that, therefore, rejection is determined.
This is distinguished from the case where he says, "I cut you hands' but
the man takes out both hands and displays them as being sound, then this
cannot be construed in the figurative sense with respect to an acknowl-
edgement for paying compensation and undertaking it as an obligation,
even though cutting of the hands is the cause for the obligation of pay-
ing wealth, as cutting by mistake is the cause for the obligation of specific
damages called arsh. This opposes the meaning of wealth in the unqual-
ified sense in its description insofar as it is imposed upon the 'aqilah to

--- Page 826 ---

110(cid:9) Al-Hidayah(cid:9) BOOK IX: EMANCIPATION
be paid within a period of two years. Establishing all this is not possible
without actual cutting of the hands. Cutting is not the cause of what can
be established. As for freedom, it does not differ in essence and in its legal
rule, therefore, it is possible to deem it the figurative meaning.
If he were to say, "This is my father:' or "This is my mother:' and
a person of this age cannot be born to them, then it is the opposite of
what we have elaborated. If he were to say about a minor boy, "This is my
grandfather:' it is said that it is governed by the same disagreement, while
it is also said that he is not emancipated by consensus, because this state-
ment does not affect ownership except through a link, which is the father,
and this is not established in his statement. Accordingly, it is not possible
to deem a figurative meaning with respect to emancipation. This is distin-
guished from paternity and sonship, because they have a direct bearing
on ownership without an intervening cause. If he were to say, "This is
my brother:' the slave is not to be emancipated according to the ?ãhir
al-Riwayah. According to AbU Hanifah (God bless him), he stands eman-
cipated. The reasoning of both narrations we have already explained. If
he were to say to his male slave, "This is my daughter' it is said that it
is governed by the same disagreement, while it is also said that it is gov-
erned by consensus as the person pointed to is not of the same gender as
the one named, therefore, the hukm is related to the one named, and she
is non-existent, therefore, is not taken into account. We have established
all this in the Book of Nika/z.
If he says to his slave girl, "You are divorced" or "You are irrevoca-
bly separated' or "Put on a veil," and he intends emancipation thereby,
she is not emancipated. Al-Shãfi'i (God bless him) said that if he intends
that then she stands emancipated. Likewise on the same disagreement
are interpreted all the explicit words as well as figurative meanings (in
marriage as well as emancipation), according to what their Mashã'ikh
(jurists) (God bless them) have said. Al-Shãfi'i (God bless him) argues
that he intended what his words probably imply, because in both types
of ownership (marriage and slave) there is some compatibility, because
both types are ownership of something that can be taken into possession.
As for milk yamin, it is obvious and likewise ownership arising from mar-
riage with respect to the hukm of an 'ayn. Consequently, perpetuity is a
condition for it and limitation by time annuls it. Both statements operate
to extinguish what is his right, which is ownership. It is for this reason
that making it contingent through a condition is valid. As for the ahkãm,

--- Page 827 ---

BOOK IX: EMANCIPATION(cid:9) Al-Hidiyah(cid:9) 111
they have been established due to a prior cause and that is his being a sub-
ject with legal capacity. It is for this reason that the words emancipation
and freedom may be used figuratively for divorce. Likewise its opposite.
In our view, he has intended something that his statement does not
imply as a probable meaning. The reason is that emancipation is a term
that established greater strength, while divorce removes a restriction. The
reason is that a slave is associated with inanimate things and with eman-
cipation he is revived with ability. The married woman is not like this for
she already possesses ability, but the restriction of marriage is an obstacle.
This obstacle is removed through divorce and the power reappears. There
is no ambiguity that the first has greater strength, and that the ownership
of the right hand is superior to the ownership through marriage, there-
fore, its extinction has greater strength too. A word is suitably used in its
figurative sense for what is lesser in reality, and not for what is superior
to it. Consequently, it will be prevented in what is disputed and will be
permitted in what is its opposite.
If he says to his slave, "You are like a freeman:' the slave is not eman-
cipated. The reason is that the term "like" (mithi) is used for participation
in some of the attributes in practice, therefore, a doubt is created with
respect to freedom.
If he were to say, "You are nothing but a freeman:' the slave stands
emancipated, because an exception for a negative meaning establishes the
positive meaning with emphasis, as is the case with the kalimat shahãdah
(There is no God, but God).
If he says, "Your head is the head of a freeman:' he is not eman-
cipated, because it is a comparison by eliminating the letter used for
comparison.' If he says, "Your head is a free head:' the slave is eman-
cipated. The reason is that this establishes freedom in his being, because
the head is an expression for the entire body.
77.1 SLAVE RELATIVES
If a person comes to own a relative in the prohibited degree of marriage,
the slave is emancipated on his account. This is a report4 related from
the Prophet (God bless him and grant him peace), "Whoever comes to
3That is, the character kaf, to say ka-ra's.
41t is related by al-Nasa'i in his Sunan. A1-Zayla'i, vol. 3, 278.

--- Page 828 ---

112(cid:9) Al-Hidayah(cid:9) BOOK IX: EMANCIPATION
own a relative in the prohibited degree that relative is emancipated."' This
tradition in its generality includes each relative permanently prohibited
for marriage whether it is by birth or otherwise. Al-Shãfi'i (God bless
him) opposes us in those who are not related by birth. He argues that the
proof of emancipation without the consent of the owner is negated by
qiyãs or it does not require it. Brotherhood and what resembles it is lesser
than kinship by birth (that is, between parents and children), therefore, it
prevents linking with them or reasoning leading to it. It is for this reason
that mukãtabah within a mukãtabah is not allowed for other than those
related by kinship of birth,' when it is not disallowed for those related by
birth.
We rely on what we have related and also on the argument that he has
come to own a relative whose relationship is effective in prohibiting mar-
riage, therefore, such relative is emancipated on his account. In fact, this
is effective in reality and kinship by birth is to be rejected (for this pur-
pose), because it is this for which the strengthening of the bond has been
made obligatory and its severing is prohibited so much so that mainte-
nance becomes obligatory and nikãh prohibited. There is no difference
if the owner is a Muslim or an unbeliever in the dãr al-Islam due to the
generality of the underlying cause ( 'illah). The mukãtab when he buys his
brother or other such relative, the relative does not become a mukatab as
he does not have complete ownership that can enable him to emancipate
him, and the obligation is linked with the ability to undertake the act.
This is distinguished from kinship by birth, because emancipation (of
the entire family) is one of the purposes of kitãbah. Accordingly, the sale
of such a relative is prohibited and the slave is set free in order to realise
the purposes of the contract. It is narrated from AbU I anifah (God bless
him) that even the brother will be part of the mukãtabah. This is the view
of the two jurists as well. Accordingly, we are obliged to prevent sale. This
is distinguished from the case where he comes to own the daughter of
his paternal uncle when she is also his sister through radã' (foster-sister),
because the prohibition is not established through kinship. A minor is
deemed eligible for such emancipation and likewise an insane person so
that a close relative is emancipated on their account when they come to
51t is related by the compilers of the four Sunan. A1-Zayla'I, vol. 3, 279.
'This means that if a mukãtab slave who is paying in instalments for his freedom
comes to own his father, the father is also treated as part of the mukãtabah. This does
not apply if he comes to own his brother.

--- Page 829 ---

BOOK IX: EMANCIPATION(cid:9) A!-Hidãyah(cid:9) 113
own him, because here the right of the individual is involved and this
resembles maintenance.
If a person emancipates a slave for the sake of Allah, or for Satan,
or for an idol, the slave stands emancipated, due to the issuance of the
essential element (rukn) of emancipation from one who has the legal
capacity to do so with respect to the subject-matter. The words for near-
ness, "for the sake of," with respect to the first case (where it is for Allah)
is an excess and its absence with respect to the other two cases does not
cause any disturbance.
Emancipation by one coerced to do so or one in a state of intoxica-
tion takes effect, due to the issuance of the essential element from one
with legal capacity with respect to the subject-matter (slave) as is the case
in divorce, and we have elaborated this earlier.
If he makes emancipation contingent upon ownership or another
condition, it is valid as in the case of divorce. As for ownership, there
is a disagreement with al-Shãfi'i (God bless him), and we elaborated this
in the Book of Divorce. As for making it contingent with a condition, the
reason is that it amounts to relinquishment ( isqat) , therefore, associating
it with a condition is valid as distinguished from other types of owner-
ship, as has been known within its own discussion.
If the slave of an enemy moves over to our territory as a Muslim, he
stands emancipated. This is based upon the words of the Prophet (God
bless him and grant him peace) about the slaves of Taif when they crossed
over to him as Muslims, "They are the emancipated slaves of Allah."7
Further, he has preserved himself in a state when he was a Muslim, and
slavery cannot be imposed on a Muslim as a new imposition.
If a person emancipates a pregnant woman, the foetus is emanci-
pated with her, as it is linked to her. If he emancipates the foetus exclu-
sively, it stands emancipated without the mother. The reason is that there
is no intended legal basis for her emancipation due to the absence of asso-
ciation with her nor with the foetus as a consequence for it amounts to
inverting the object of emancipation. Thereafter the emancipation of the
foetus is valid, but its sale and gift is not valid, but none of these is a
condition for emancipation, therefore, they are distinguished.
If a person emancipates a foetus in lieu of wealth, it is valid, but the
wealth is not due, because there is no basis for obligating the payment of
71t is recorded by Abü DawUd in the chapter on jihad. A1-Zayla'i, vol. 3, 280.

--- Page 830 ---

114(cid:9) Al-Hid.yah(cid:9) BOOK IX: EMANCIPATION
wealth for the foetus, due to the lack of authority over it, nor is there a
basis for making it binding for the mother with respect to a being whose
existence is separate from her. Further, stipulating a counter-value for
emancipation on someone other than the one being emancipated is not
valid, as has preceded in the discussion of khul'. The existence of preg-
nancy at the time of emancipation will be known when she bring forth
the child in a period that is less than six months from the time of eman-
cipation, as that is the minimum period of gestation.
The child of a slave woman from her master is a free person, as it has
been created from his sperm, therefore, it is emancipated on his account.
This is the basic rule and there is nothing conflicting with it, as the child
of a slave girl belongs to the master.
The child of a slave woman from her husband belongs to her master,
due to its inclination towards the mother on the basis of hadanah or due
to the mingling of his sperm with hers where mutual exclusion is realised,
while the husband has consented to this, as distinguished from the child
of the one deceived for in that case the father has not consented.
The child of a freewoman is a freeman under all circumstances,
because inclination towards her is greater, therefore, he follows her with
respect to the attribute of freedom just as he follows her in ownership,
slavery, tadbir (freedom after death), being the child of the slave mother,
as well as kitãbah. Allah, the Exalted, knows best.

--- Page 831 ---

Chapter 78
Partial Emancipation
If the master emancipates part of his slave that part stands emanci-
pated, and he works for the rest of the value for his master, according
to Abü Hanifah (God bless him). The two jurists said that the slave is
fully emancipated. The basis is that emancipation can be split into parts
in his view and emancipation can thus be confined to the part that is
emancipated. According to the two jurists emancipation cannot be split
into parts, and this is also the view of al-Sháfi'i (God bless him). Accord-
ingly, associating emancipation with part of the slave is like associating it
with the whole, therefore, the slave is emancipated as a whole. The two
jurists argue that emancipation is the establishing of freedom, which is a
legal power, and it is established by negating its opposite, which is slav-
ery and that is a legal deficiency. In their view, all this cannot be split
into parts and is like divorce, pardon in the case of qisãs, and declaring
a slave woman to be an umm al-wa/ad. According to Abü Hanifah (God
bless him) emancipation is the establishing of the attribute of freedom by
eliminating ownership or it is the elimination of ownership itself, because
ownership is his right, while slavery is the right of the law (shar') or it is
a public right. The authority for transaction is whatever falls under the
authority of the person undertaking the transaction and this is restricted
to the extinction of his right and nothing more. The basic rule is that
a transaction is restricted to the object to which it is associated, while
extension beyond that takes place due to necessity and in the absence of
divisibility. Ownership, however, is divisible as in the case of sale and gift.
Accordingly, emancipation in this case will follow this rule.
Earning becomes obligatory as the value of the remaining part of the
ownership is in control of the slave. According to Abü Hanifah (God bless
115

--- Page 832 ---

116(cid:9) Al-Hidayah(cid:9) BOOK IX: EMANCIPATION
him), the slave on whom earning becomes obligatory has the status of a
mukãtab slave, because attributing emancipation to a part gives rise to
the affirmation of ownership in the whole (for purposes of emancipa-
tion), but the continuance of ownership in part of the slave prevents this.
Consequently, we have acted upon both evidences by granting him the
status of the mukãtab, for he has the possession and not the ownership,
and earning has become like the counter-value of kitãbah. The master has
the right to demand earning from him and he has the option to emanci-
pate him (completely), because the mukãtab is eligible for emancipation,
except that in this case if he is unable to pay he does not revert to slavery.
The reason is that it is an extinction of a right that is not in favour of
anyone, therefore, it does not accept rescission, as distinguished from the
case where kitãbah is intended ab initio, as that is a contract that accepts
iqalah (negotiated settlement) as well as rescission. In divorce and pardon
from qisãs there is no middle ground, therefore, we have affirmed it for
the whole giving preference to the prohibited over the permitted. Istilãd
is divisible in his view, thus, where the owner makes a mudabbarah and
urnm walad up to the extent of his share, it will be restricted to that share
alone. In the case of a (jointly owned) slave girl, when he guarantees the
share of his co-owner by rendering his ownershipfasid through istilãd, he
comes to own her fully through the guarantee and istilãd is completed.
Where the slave is owned by two co-owners and one of them eman-
cipates his share, the slave is emancipated as a whole. If the emancipator
is enjoying financial ease, the co-owner has the option to either eman-
cipate the slave to the extent of his share or to hold his co-owner liable
for the value of his share or even to hold the slave liable for earning and
paying his share. Where he holds the co-owner liable, he has recourse to
the slave, and the wala' belongs to the emancipator. If he sets him free or
asks him to earn his share, then the walã' belongs to both. If the eman-
cipator is in a difficult financial position, the co-owner has the option
to emancipate the slave or to ask him to earn his share, and the wala'
is shared by them in both cases. This is the position according to AbU
Hanifah (God bless him). The two jurists maintain that he has no choice
in the case of financial ease except to hold the emancipator liable for his
share and in the case of financial difficulty to ask the slave to earn his
share. Further, the emancipator does not have recourse to the slave for
the amount, and the walã' belongs to the emancipator.

--- Page 833 ---

BOOK IX: EMANCIPATION(cid:9) Al-Hidãyah(cid:9) 117
This issue' is structured upon two principles. The first is the divis-
ibility and non-divisibility of emancipation, as we have explained. The
second is that the financial ease of the emancipator does not prevent the
imposition of earning on the slave according to Abü Hanifah (God bless
him), while it does prevent it according to the two jurists. The two jurists
argue, with respect to the second principle, on the basis of the words of
the Prophet (God bless him and grant him peace) about a person eman-
cipating his slave that if he is well off, he is to be held liable for the share
of the partner, but if he is poor the slave is to earn his share.' Thus, he
divided the liabilities, and division negates participation. According to
Abü Hanifah (God bless him), he locked up the value of the partner
within the slave, therefore, he has the right to hold him liable. It is just
like the blowing wind casting the dress of a person into the dye prepared
by another thereby colouring the dress; the owner of the dress is liable for
paying the cost of the dye whether he is in financial difficulties or is well
Off, as we have said. Likewise here, except that the slave is poor, therefore,
he is asked to earn. Thereafter, the financial ease that is stipulated is that
of adequacy, that is, he should own wealth that is sufficient to pay for the
share of the co-owner. It is not the financial ease of the wealthy, because
with adequate ease a balance is maintained between the two sides by the
realisation of what the emancipator intended with respect to nearness to
Allah and the delivery of the share to the one who remained silent.
Thereafter the legal reasoning for deriving the rule (takhrij) emerg-
ing from the view of the two jurists is obvious, which is that the absence
of recourse to the slave by the emancipator for the amount for which he
has been made liable is due to the absence of imposing earning on the
slave in the state of financial ease where the walã' goes to the emanci-
pator, as emancipation is entirely on his part due to its indivisibility. As
for the takhrij on the basis of his (AbU Hanifah's) opinion, the option of
emancipation is due to the continuation of his ownership in the slave, as
emancipation is divisible in his view. The imposition of liability on the
emancipator is that of an offender for he has rendered vitiated the co-
owner's share in the slave insofar as it prevents his sale, gift and so on,
that is, transactions other than emancipation and its consequences along
with requiring him to work, as we have elaborated. The emancipator has
'That is, recourse by the emancipator to the slave for the value of the remaining
ownership and not having recourse to him on the provision of security.
21t is recorded by all the six sound compilations. Al-Zayla'i, vol. 3, 282.

--- Page 834 ---

118(cid:9) Al-Hidayah(cid:9) BOOK IX: EMANCIPATION
recourse to the slave for the payment he guaranteed, because he comes
to stand in the place of the one remaining silent through the provision
of surety. The co-owner had the right to recover the amount by making
him earn; likewise the emancipator. The reason is that he came to own
him indirectly by the payment of the amount due. It is now as if he owns
him solely and he has emancipated a part of the slave, therefore, he has
the option to emancipate the remaining part or if he likes to ask him to
earn the value. The walã' belongs to the emancipator on the basis of this
reasoning. The reason is that emancipation is entirely on his part inso-
far as he came to own him entirely on the payment of the amount due.
In the case of financial difficulty of the emancipator if he likes he may
emancipate him (entirely) due to the continuation of his ownership and
if he likes he asks him to work as we have elaborated. Walã' belongs to
the emancipator in both cases, because emancipation is on his part. The
person (slave) obliged to work does not have recourse to the emancipa-
tor for what he has paid on the basis of a consensus among our jurists,
because he has worked for release from his bondage and he is not paying
a debt on account of the emancipator, for he does not owe anything due
to his financial hardship. This is different from the pledged slave if he is
emancipated by the pledgor who is in difficult straits, because he is work-
ing for the release of bondage or for a debt that is due from the pledgor,
therefore, he has recourse to him.
The opinion of al-Shãfi'i (God bless him) in the case of financial
difficulties is like the opinion of the two jurists. In the case of financial
difficulties, he said the share of the co-owner stays within his ownership
and he may sell it or gift it. The reason is that there is no basis for making
the co-owner liable due to his financial hardship, nor is there a basis for
making the slave earn its value for the slave is not an offender and he has
not consented to this. Further, there is no basis for emancipating the slave
completely due to the injury being caused to the silent co-owner, there-
fore, what stands determined is what we determined. We said that earning
is a means for it does not need an offence to be justified, rather earning is
based on the arresting of value within the slave. Thus, the power arising
from ownership and the negative deficiency cannot both be combined in
one person.
If each co-owner furnishes testimony against his co-owner about
emancipation, the slave will work for both for their shares whether they
are in financial ease or difficulty, according to AbU Hanifah (God bless

--- Page 835 ---

BOOK IX: EMANCIPATION(cid:9) Al-Hidiiyah(cid:9) 119
him). Likewise, if one of them is enjoying financial ease, while the other
is facing financial hardship. The reason is that each one of them believes
that his co-owner has emancipated his share, therefore, he has become
like a mukãtib in conformity with his belief, according to Abü Hanifah
(God bless him). Consequently, it has become prohibited for him to
enslave him, and he acknowledges this with respect to himself, there-
fore, he is prevented from keeping him in bondage and he makes him
earn. The reason is that we are sure about the right to make him earn
whether he is lying or is truthful for he is either his mukãtab or his slave.
Accordingly, they make him work and this does not differ with finan-
cial ease or difficulty, because his right in both situations is in one of
two things. The financial ease of the emancipator does not prevent the
requirement of earning, in Abü Hanifah's view. Making the co-owner
liable has become difficult due to the denial of the co-owner, thus, the
other option is implemented, which is the requirement of earning. Wa/a'
belongs to both of them for each one of them claims that the share of the
co-owner has been emancipated against his right, due to emancipation
on his part, thus, the walã' belongs to him, and he says: "My share has
been emancipated through earning, therefore, wa/a' belongs to me."
AbU Yüsuf and Muhammad (God bless him) said that if both are
enjoying financial ease there is no requirement of work for the slave. The
reason is that each one of them absolved him of earning through his claim
of emancipation against his co-owner, because the financial ease of the
emancipator prevents earning in the opinion of the two jurists. The claim
is not established due to the denial of the other, however, being absolved
of earning is established by his acknowledgement against himself.
If they are in financial difficulties, he is to work for both, because
each one of them claims that he is required to work for him whether he
is lying or is truthful, as we have elaborated, for the emancipator is in
financial straits.
If one of them is enjoying financial ease while the other is facing
financial constraints, he is to work for the one who is enjoying finan-
cial ease. The reason is that he is not claiming compensation from his
co-owner due to his financial difficulty; he merely demands earning from
the slave, therefore, the slave is not absolved from earning. He is not to
earn for the one who is in a difficult financial situation. The reason is
that he claims compensation from his co-owner due to his financial ease,
therefore, he is absolving the slave from earning. Walã' is suspended in

--- Page 836 ---

120(cid:9) Al-Hidayah(cid:9) BOOK IX: EMANCIPATION
all this, according to the two jurists, because each one of them is transfer-
ring it to his co-owner, while he claims to be absolved of it, thus, it is to
remain suspended until they agree about emancipation by one of them.
If one of the co-owners says, "If so and so does not enter this house
tomorrow, then this slave is a freeman?' The other co-owner says, "If
he enters this house, he is free?' The next day passes, but it is not
known whether or not the person entered the house, one-half of the
slave stands emancipated, and he works for them for the other half. This
is the rule according to AbU lIanifah and Abü YUsuf (God bless them).
Muhammad (God bless him) said that he is to work for his entire value.
The reason is that by the extinction of the requirement of work, the per-
son against whom judgement has to be given becomes unknown, and an
award cannot be made against an unknown person. It is as if he says to
another, "You have a claim of one thousand dirhams against one of us."
In such a case, no ruling can be issued against either one of them due to
uncertainty. Likewise here. The two jurists argue that we are certain about
the extinction of one-half of the earning. The reason is that one of them
here is certainly breaking his vow, and with certainty about the extinc-
tion of one-half. How then can a ruling be given about the obligation of
the entire amount? Uncertainty is removed through spreading and distri-
bution (of the liability), as in the case where a person emancipates one of
his two slaves without identifying one specific slave or by identifying him,
but forgetting which one and dying before recalling or elaborating. The
derivation of rules in this is based upon the issue whether or not financial
ease prevents the requirement of earning, and this is in accordance with
the disagreement that has preceded.
If they take the oath (as in the previous issue) about two slaves,
each one owned by them separately, none of them will be emancipated.
The reason is that the person against whom the ruling with respect to
emancipation is to be given is unknown. Likewise, the subject-matter of
emancipation is unknown. Uncertainty, therefore, becomes intense and
prevents judgement. In the case of a single slave, the person in whose
favour the judgement is to be rendered and the subject-matter of the
judgement is known, thus, the known part dominates the unknown part.
If two persons buy the son of one of them, the share of the father
stands emancipated. The reason is that he has come to own a part of his
relative and such purchase amounts to emancipation, as has preceded.
No compensation is imposed on him (for the share of the co-owner),

--- Page 837 ---

BOOK IX: EMANCIPATION(cid:9) Al-Hidãyah(cid:9) 121
whether or not the other was aware that he was his relative. The same
applies if they come to inherit him, and the co-owner has the option to
either emancipate his share or to require the slave to earn the value. This
is the rule according to Abü Hanifah (God bless him). The two jurists said
that in the case of purchase the father pays one-half of the value if he is
enjoying financial ease. If he is in financial difficulties, the son works for
half the value for the co-owner of his father. The same disagreement gov-
erns cases where they come to own him through a gift, charity or bequest.
In accordance with this reasoning, if two persons buy him, when one
of them has taken an oath that he will emancipate him if he comes to
own one-half share in him, the two jurists maintain that the father has
annulled the share of his co-owner through emancipation, because buy-
ing a relative amounts to emancipation. This becomes similar to the case
where two strangers come to own the slave and one of them emancipates
his share. According to Abft Hanifah (God bless him), he has consented
to the vitiation of his share, therefore, he cannot ask him for compensa-
tion. It is as if he had expressly asked him to emancipate his share, and
the evidence of this is that he participated with him in something that
becomes the underlying cause of emancipation, which is purchase. The
reason is that purchase of a close relative is his emancipation to the extent
that he becomes free of the liability of expiation through it, in our view.
According to the apparent meaning of the opinion of the two jurists, the
payment of the value is compensation for wasting his share, and it differs
in the case of financial ease and difficulty, while it is extinguished due to
consent. The rule does not differ with knowledge or lack of it, which is
an authentic narration (zãhir al-riwãyah) from Abü Hanifah (God bless
him). The reason is that the rule revolves around the cause; it is as if he
says to another, "Eat this food' when the food is owned by the one giving
the order, but the one giving the order is not aware of this.
If a stranger begins first and purchases one-half of the slave, after
which the father comes and purchases the other half, and he is well off,
then the stranger possesses the option; if he likes he can hold the father
liable for compensation. The reason is that he did not consent to the viti-
ation of his share. If he likes, he can make the son work for the value of
his half, for his share stands arrested within the slave. This is the view
according to AbU Hanifah (God bless him). The reason is that the finan-
cial ease of the emancipator does not prevent the requirement of work, in
his view. The two jurists said that he has no option, and he is to hold the

--- Page 838 ---

122(cid:9) Al-Hidãyah(cid:9) BOOK IX: EMANCIPATION
father liable for half the slave's value. The reason is that financial ease of
the emancipator prevents the requirement of work in their view.
If a person buys one-half of his son, while he is enjoying financial
ease, there is no liability for him (of paying for the other half), according
to Abü Hanifah (God bless him). The two jurists said that he is liable if
he is enjoying financial ease. This means that he buys one-half from a
person who owns the entire slave. Thus, the seller will have no claim of
compensation in his view. We have already stated the underlying legal
reasoning.
If a slave is owned by three persons, and one of the co-owners enjoy-
ing financial ease declares that he will be free after his death, thereafter
another co-owner, also enjoying financial ease, emancipates him, after
which they agree upon liabilities, then the one remaining silent has the
right to make the mudabbir liable for one-third of the value of the entire
Slave, but he does not make the emancipator liable, while the mudabbir
has the right to make the emancipator liable up to one-third of the value
of the mudabbar slave (that is, one-third of two-thirds of the whole),
and he does not hold him liable for the one-third that he paid. This is
the position according to Abu Hanifah (God bless him). The two jurists
said that the entire slave now belongs to the one who made him a mud-
abbar initially, and he is liable to his two co-owners for two-thirds of the
value of the slave irrespective of his being financially sound or in difficult
straits. The basis for this issue is that tadbir is divisible according to Abu
Hanifah (God bless him) with the two jurists disagreeing as is the case
with emancipation. The reason is that tadbir is an offshoot of emancipa-
tion and will be analysed accordingly. As it is divisible in his view, it will
be restricted to the share of the mudabbir, but he has vitiated the shares
of the two other co-owners. Thus, each one of the two has an option to
either to adopt tadbir for his share, to emancipate, to adopt mukãtabah,
to hold the mudabbir liable for compensation, to make the slave work for
compensation, or to leave him in that state. The reason is that the shares
of each of the two co-owners continue to be owned by them having been
vitiated through the vitiation of their co-owner insofar as the means of
benefiting from him through sale or gift have been blocked for them, as
already explained. If one of these two opts for emancipation, his right is
determined with respect to the slave, and he loses his other options. This
gives rise to two causes of liability for the co-owner who is silent: tadbir
by the mudabbir and emancipation by the emancipator. He has the right,

--- Page 839 ---

BOOK IX: EMANCIPATION(cid:9) Al-Hidãyah(cid:9) 123
however, to hold the mudabbir liable so that the compensation becomes
compensation as a counter-value,3 as that is the primary form of com-
pensation, and it has even been deemed so for usurpation according to
our principle. This is possible in the case of tadbir, because it is possible
to transfer it from one ownership to another at the time of tadbir, but it
is not possible in the case of emancipation for at that time he is either a
mukatab or a freeman, subject to the disagreement between the two prin-
ciples. Further, rescission requires the consent of the mukãtab so that it
can accept transfer. For these reasons he is to hold the mudabbir liable.
Thereafter, the mudabbir has the right to hold the emancipator liable for
a third of the value in the state of tadbir, because he caused vitiation of his
share as a mudabbir. Compensation is estimated according to the value of
the destroyed thing, and the value of the mudabbar is two-thirds of the
value of the entire slave according to what they (the jurists) say. He is not
to hold him liable for his value for compensation from the perspective of
the silent co-owner, because the ownership is established after reliance on
tadbir. It is established at the time of compensation and not at the time
of tadbir, therefore, it is not applicable to the liability of the emancipator.
Wa/a' will be shared between the mudabbir and the emancipator on the
basis of thirds, with two-thirds going to the mudabbir and one-third to
the emancipator, because the slave has been emancipated through their
ownership in this ratio. As tadbir is not divisible in the opinion of the
two jurists, the entire slave will belong to the mudabbir. He has vitiated
the shares of the two co-owners, as we elaborated, therefore, he will com-
pensate them. This rule does not differ on the basis of financial ease and
hardship, for it is compensation in lieu of transfer of ownership, thus, it
resembles the case of the umm walad, and is distinguished from eman-
cipation for that is compensation arising from an offence (of vitiation).
Wa/a' in this case belongs entirely to the mudabbir, which is obvious.
If a slave girl is owned by two men where one of them thinks that
she is the umm walad of the other, but the other denies this, then she
is to remain suspended from service for one day and the next day she
is to serve the one who denied, according to AbU Hanifah (God bless
him). The two jurists said that the one who denies, if he likes, may make
her work for half her value, and thereafter she becomes free with no
hold over her. The two jurists argue that when his co-owner does not
3And not compensation resulting from an offence.

--- Page 840 ---

124(cid:9) Al-Hidãyah(cid:9) BOOK IX: EMANCIPATION
confirm his claim, the acknowledgement reverts to the one who made
the claim. It is as if he has himself made her an umm walad. The case
becomes like one where the buyer makes a claim that the seller eman-
cipated the slave prior to the sale as in this case he (the buyer) will be
deemed to have emancipated her. Likewise here. This prevents service to
him, but the share of the one denying remains under the rule of owner-
ship. Thus, she can move towards freedom through earning, as in the case
of a Christian slave mother when she converts to Islam. According to AbU
Hanifah (God bless him) had his claim been affirmed, the entire service
would have been for the one denying (in reality), but if it was denied the
denier would have half of the service, thus, what is certain is established,
which is one-half. There is no service for the co-owner who testified nor
is there the option of earning, because he extinguished all this through
his claim of istilãd and compensation. An acknowledgement of being an
umm walad includes the acknowledgement of paternity; it is a presump-
tion that is not rebuttable, therefore, it is not possible to consider the one
acknowledging as one who has declared her his umm walad.4
If an umm walad is owned by two men, and one of them emancipates
her, while he is in a sound financial condition, there is no liability for
compensation on him, according to AbU IIanifah (God bless him). The
two jurists said that he is liable for one-half of her value. The reason is
that in his view the umm walad does not have a marketable value, while
she does have a marketable value in their opinion. On this rule, a number
of issues are structured and these we have recorded in Kifayat al-Muntahi.
The reasoning of the two jurists is that she is being utilised for sex,
hiring and service. This is an evidence of her having a marketable value.
By the prevention of her sale, her marketable value is not extinguished, as
in the case of the mudabbar slave. Do you not see that a Christian umm
walad, when she converts to Islam, is obliged to earn her value, and this
is a sign of her having a marketable value, except that her value is one-
third of the value of a regular slave, as the jurists have said, due to the
loss of the benefit of sale and working after death (of the master). This is
distinguished from the case of the mudabbar, because what is lost is the
benefit of sale, but earning and service still continue.
4This is a response to the above assertion of the two jurists, "It is as if he has himself
made her an umm walad."

--- Page 841 ---

BOOK IX: EMANCIPATION(cid:9) Al-Hidãyah(cid:9) 125
According to Abü Hanifah (God bless him), marketable value is based
on the type of ownership, and she is in possession for procreation and
not for having a marketable value. Possession for marketability is sec-
ondary. It is for this reason that she does not work for repaying a debt,
or for an heir, as distinguished from the case of the mudabbar. The rea-
son for this distinction is that the cause (which is freedom) has been
realised for her in her current state, and this is the relationship between
her and the master through the child, as has been known about the pro-
hibition of marriage, except that its operation has not been given effect
with respect to ownership due to the necessity of benefiting from her.
The cause, therefore, operates to extinguish her marketability. In the case
of the mudabbar the cause comes into effect after death (of the master),
and the prevention of sale in his case is for the realisation of this pur-
pose, therefore, the two are distinguished. In the case of the Christian
umm walad we have ruled about her becoming a mukãtab slave in order
to avoid injury to both sides. The counter-value of mukatabah does not
necessitate the existence of marketability.

--- Page 842 ---

126(cid:9) Al-Hidayah(cid:9) BOOK IX: EMANCIPATION

--- Page 843 ---

Chapter 79
Emancipating One of Several Slaves
If a person has three slaves, and when two of them come to him he says,
"One of you is a freeman?" Thereafter one departs, and another enters,
and then he says, "One of you is a freeman." He dies following this with-
out elaborating. The slave who faced the statement twice will be free to
the extent of three-fourths, while the two other slaves will be free to the
extent of one-half of each. This is the view according to AbU Hanifah
and AbU YUsuf (God bless them). Muhammad (God bless him) said the
same except for the third slave who he said would be free to the extent of
one-fourth. The first statement applies to the one who went out and to
the one who remained, who heard the statement twice, thus, the eman-
cipation from slavery applies equally to both due to their equality with
respect to slavery. Both are, therefore, entitled to one-half emancipation.
The slave who stayed back derived another fourth from the second state-
ment, because the second statement applies to him and to the one who
entered later, and he is the one whom he (Imãm Muhammad) called "the
other" in the Book, therefore, it will be distributed in halves among them.
The first, however, who stayed behind, became entitled to one-half of
freedom with the first statement, thus, the entitlement with respect to
the second statement will be spread over his two halves (one free and
the other in bondage). The half that applies to the half freed due to the
first statement becomes redundant, while the second half that applies to
the unoccupied part will apply and he will be free to the extent of one-
fourth. This completes three-fourths for him. The reason is that if the
master had intended thereby the slave staying behind, he would be free to
the extent of one-half and had he intended the one entering later, this half
would not be emancipated. Consequently, the halves are spread out and
127

--- Page 844 ---

128(cid:9) Al-Hidayah(cid:9) Booic IX: EMANCIPATION
he is emancipated up to one-fourth by the second statement and to the
extent of one-half by the first. As for the slave entering later, Muhammad
(God bless him) says that when the statement applies to him and to the
one staying behind, and when the one staying behind derives one-fourth
from it, the one entering later should derive the same. The two jurists say
that it does apply to both, but the issue is of spreading the halves, which
reduces it to one-fourth for the one staying on due to his entitlement
to one-half through the first statement, as we have mentioned. The one
entering later was not entitled to any emancipation prior to this so he will
be given one-half.
He (Muhammad) said: If the statements made by him were dur-
ing terminal illness, one-third of this (wealth) will be distributed. The
commentary of this statement is that the emancipated shares are to be
gathered together, and these are seven according to the two jurists. The
reason is that we take the lowest denominator for each slave to be four due
our need for working on the basis of three over four (the largest fraction).
We therefore say: The one who stayed back is emancipated to the extent
of three shares, while the other two are emancipated to the extent of two
shares. The emancipated shares, thus, come to seven. Emancipation dur-
ing terminal illness is a bequest and its implementation is up to one-third
of the subject-matter. It is, therefore, necessary to make the share of the
heirs double of this. Accordingly, each slave will be analysed into seven
shares with the entire wealth coming to twenty-one shares. The one who
stayed back will be emancipated up to three shares and he is made to earn
the remaining four. From the other two slaves, two shares each are to be
emancipated and they earn the remaining five shares. When you ponder
over this and make the addition it all adds up to one-third plus two-
thirds. According to Muhammad (God bless him), each slave is analysed
into six shares, for the one entering later is given one share in his view.
This reduces the emancipated shares by one share and the entire wealth
comes to eighteen shares. The remaining derivation is according to what
has preceded.
Had this happened in the case of divorce, where the marriage had
not been consummated with any of them, with the husband dying prior
to an elaboration, one-fourth of the dower of the one who went out
would be extinguished, three-eighths from the one who stayed and one-
eight from the dower of the one who entered later. It is said that this is
exclusively the view of Muhammad (God bless him), while the two jurists

--- Page 845 ---

BOOK IX: EMANCIPATION(cid:9) Al-Hidãyah(cid:9) 129
maintain that one-fourth will be extinguished. It is also said that it is the
view of the two jurists as well. We have mentioned the difference and all
its sub-issues in (the commentary of) al-Ziyãdãt.
If a man says to his two slaves, "One of you is free?' Thereafter he
sells one of them or one of them dies, or if he said to him (one of them),
"You are free after my death:" the (remaining) slave stands emancipated.
The reason is that the slave is no longer the subject-matter of emanci-
pation due to death and for emancipation by this man due to his sale,
and also for emancipation from each perspective for purposes of tadbir.
Accordingly, the remaining slave will be identified for emancipation. Fur-
ther, through sale he intended to obtain the price and through tadbir the
derivation of benefit up to his death. Both purposes negate emancipation
that has been made an obligation, therefore, the remaining slave is identi-
fied by implication. Likewise if he declares one of two female slaves as an
umm walad. In this case, there is no difference between valid and irregu-
lar sales with or without possession, nor is there a a difference between an
unqualified sale or one that grants an option to one of the parties to the
contract. This is due to the absolute nature of the statement in the Book.
The meaning of all this is in what we said (with respect to the purposes).
Making an offer for sale is linked directly to the sale according to a narra-
tion preserved from Abü Yüsuf (God bless him). Gift with delivery, and
donation with delivery have the same status as sale, because it amounts
to transferring of title.
The same applies if he says to his two wives, "You are divorced" and
then one of them dies, due to what we said. Likewise, if he has intercourse
with one of them, on the basis of our elaboration.
If he says to his two slave girls, "One of you is free' but thereafter
has intercourse with one of them, the other is not emancipated, accord-
ing to AbU Hanifah (God bless him). The two jurists said that she is
emancipated. The reason is that intercourse is not permitted except on
the basis of ownership and one of them is a freewoman. By undertaking
intercourse he seeks to maintain ownership with the slave woman that he
slept with, therefore, the other stands identified due to the elimination of
ownership due to emancipation, as is the case with divorce. The Imãm
(God bless him) argues that ownership subsists in the case of the slave
woman with whom he had intercourse, because emancipation pertains
to an unknown person, while she is ascertained, therefore, having inter-
course with her is permitted. This does not amount to an elaboration

--- Page 846 ---

130(cid:9) Al-Hidayah(cid:9) BOOK IX: EMANCIPATION
of the statement (of emancipation) he made. Accordingly, having inter-
course with either is permitted in his view, except that he did not issue a
fatwa on this basis.' Thereafter it is said that emancipation is not elimi-
nated prior to an elaboration, because it is linked to it. In the alternative it
is said that it is eliminated with respect to one unknown and will be evi-
dent through his acceptance, while intercourse is only possible with the
one identified. This is distinguished from divorce, because the primary
purpose of marriage is procreation. The intention to procreate through
intercourse indicates the continuation of ownership in the woman with
whom he is cohabiting in order to preserve the interests of the child. As
for the slave woman, the purpose of intercourse with her is the satisfac-
tion of carnal desire without procreation, therefore, it does not indicate
the continuation of ownership.
If a person says to his slave girl, "If the first child you give birth to is a
boy, then you are free:' but she gives birth to a boy and a girl, and it is not
known who was born first, then one-half of the mother is emancipated
and one-half of the girl, but the boy remains a slave. Each one of them
(the mother and daughter) will be emancipated in one situation, which
is where the woman has given birth to the boy first; she is emancipated
due to the stipulation, while the girl is free as she follows the mother, and
the mother is a freewoman when she gave birth to her. They will remain
in bondage in another situation, which is where she gives birth to the girl
first, and this due to the absence of fulfilment of the condition. Thus (in
this situation), one-half of each one of them (mother and daughter) is
emancipated. The boy, however, remains in bondage in both situations,
therefore, he remains a slave. If the mother claims that it was the boy who
was born first, whereas the master denies this, while the girl is a minor,
then the acceptable statement is that of the master along with his oath
as he is denying the occurrence of the condition of the emancipation. If
he takes the oath, none of them will be emancipated, but if he refuses to
take the oath, the mother and the girl will be emancipated, because the
claim of the mother pertains to the freedom of the minor girl and this
is taken into account being a pure benefit. Consequently, the refusal is
taken into account for purpose of their freedom, and we declare them
1n short, the Imãm is saying that the statement made by the person in this issue is
1
not legally admissible for purposes of emancipation. Further, the act of intercourse is
not linked or cannot be linked with this statement, and cannot act as an elaboration of
the statement.

--- Page 847 ---

Al-Hidyah(cid:9) 131
BOOK IX: EMANCIPATION(cid:9)
free. If the girl is a major and she does not claim anything, and the mat-
ter is as it was (where she claims that the boy was born first), the mother
alone is emancipated due to the refusal of the master to take the oath, but
not the girl, because the claim of the mother is not effective in determin-
ing the rights of a major girl. The validity of the refusal depends upon the
claim, therefore, it does not apply to the status of the girl. If the major girl
is the claimant about the precedence of the boy's birth and the mother
remains silent, the freedom of the girl is established through refusal of
the master to take oath, but not that of the mother, due to what we said.
The administering of the oath is on the basis of knowledge, in the situa-
tions we have mentioned, because it is an oath about the act of another,
and through this explanation the situations we mentioned in Kifayat a!-
Muntahi become known.
If two men testify against a man that he emancipated one of his
two slaves, then the testimony is void according to Abü klanifah (God
bless him), unless it pertains to a bequest, on the basis of istihsãn, which
he mentioned in the Book of Emancipation. If two men testify that he
divorced one of his two wives, the testimony is acceptable and the hus-
band will be compelled to divorce one of them. This is based on con-
sensus (ijmã'). AbU YUsuf and Muhammad (God bless them) said that
the position of the testimony in emancipation is the same as this (that is
divorce). The rule in this is that testimony about emancipation of a male
slave is not acceptable without a claim being lodged by the slave, accord-
ing to Abü Hanifah (God bless him), while it is acceptable according
to the two jurists. Testimony about the emancipation of a slave woman
and the divorce of a married woman is acceptable without a claim by
agreement, and the issue is well known. Insofar as the claim of the male
slave is a condition according to the Imãm, it is not realised in the issue
stated in the Book. The reason is that the claim of an unknown per-
son cannot be the basis of adjudication, therefore, the testimony is not
accepted. According to the two jurists, it is not a condition so the testi-
mony is accepted even though the claim is non-existent. As for divorce,
the absence of a claim does not give rise to vitiation of the testimony, as
it is not a condition for it. If the two men testify that he emancipated one
of his two slave women, the testimony is not acceptable according to Abü
Hanifah (God bless him), even though a claim is not a condition for it.
The reason is that the claim is not stipulated as it includes the prohibition
of sex, therefore, it is similar to divorce. Ambiguous emancipation does

--- Page 848 ---

Al-Hidiyah(cid:9)
132(cid:9) BOOK IX: EMANCIPATION
not give rise to the prohibition of sex, in his view, as we have mentioned,
thus, it amounts to testimony about the emancipation of one of two male
slaves. All this applies if the two render testimony about his emancipating
one of his two slaves while he was in sound health.
If, however, they testify that he emancipated one of his two slaves,
while he was in a terminal illness, or they testify to his declaring tadbir
in sound health or during terminal illness, and the rendering of testi-
mony is during his terminal illness or after his death, it is accepted on
the basis of istihsãn, because tadbir when it occurs, it occurs by way of
a bequest. Likewise, emancipation during terminal illness amounts to a
bequest. The litigant in a bequest is the legator, and he is known, and
he also has representatives and these are the wasi or the heir. The reason
is that emancipation pronounced during terminal illness gets distributed
between the two slaves, therefore, each one of them is a known litigant.
If the two persons testify after his death that he said in sound health that
one of them was free, then it is said that it is not to be accepted as it does
not amount to a bequest, while it is also said that it is to be accepted as
emancipation stands distributed between both. Allah knows best.

--- Page 849 ---

Chapter 8o
Oath of Emancipation
If a person says, "If I enter the house then all the slaves that I own that
day are free?' He does not have slaves, but if he buys them and then
enters the house they stand emancipated. The reason is that his saying,
that day' means "the day I enter' except that he extinguished the act
through the syntax so that what is taken into account is the existence
of ownership at the time of entry. Likewise, if on the day of the oath
there was in his ownership a slave who remained in his ownership till he
entered, he too will be emancipated, due to what we have said.
If he had not said in his oath the words "that day' they would not
be emancipated. The reason is that his saying, "all the slaves that I own'
applies to the present and the consequence is the freedom of the slaves
owned at present, except that when the condition is inserted into the
consequence, it is delayed till the time of the fulfilment of the condition,
therefore, the slave is emancipated if he remains in his ownership up to
the time of entry. This statement, however, does not include the slaves
who were bought after the oath.
If a person says, "All the male slaves I own are free," then if he has a
slave woman who is pregnant and gives birth to a male, he is not eman-
cipated. This is the case if she gives birth to the child within six months
or more. The reason is that the statement is for the present, and there is a
probability of the conception taking place at the time of the oath due to
the passage of the minimum period after it. The same applies if she gives
birth to the child in less than six months, because the statement includes
owned slaves in absolute terms, and the foetus is owned too following
the mother, though not as the intended purpose. The reason is that he is
like a limb in some respects and the term owned slaves includes life and
133

--- Page 850 ---

134(cid:9) Al-Hidayah(cid:9)
BOOK IX: EMANCIPATION
not limbs. Accordingly, the master does not have the right to sell the foe-
tus independently. This feeble servant says: The effect of the qualification
with the words "male" is that had he said, "all the slaves owned by me" it
would have included the pregnant woman and consequently the foetus.
If he were to say, "Each slave that I own is free day after tomorrow," or
he says, "Each slave that I have, is free day after tomorrow," and he has
slaves, but he buys another one, thereafter, on the day after tomorrow
the slaves that he owned at the time of the oath are emancipated. The
reason is that his words, "I own' apply to the present in reality like his
saying, "I own so and so," and he means thereby at present. Likewise such
a statement is employed without context and for the future by associating
it with the literal forms used for the future. The unqualified statement
applies to the present, thus, the consequence is the freedom of the slave
at present in association with the day after tomorrow, therefore, it does
not include the slave he bought after the oath.
If he says, "Each slave that I own," or says, "Each slave that I have, is
free after my death' and he has slaves, but he buys another slave, then
the one who was in his ownership at the time of the oath will be a mud-
abbar, but the one bought later is not a mudabbar and when he dies he
is emancipated from a third of his estate. AbU Yüsuf (God bless him)
said in al-Nawadir that the one in his ownership on the day of the oath is
emancipated, but the one acquired after his oath is not emancipated. On
the same lines if he says, "Each slave that I have, when I die he is free," then
he argues that the statement is applied in reality to the present, in accor-
dance with our elaboration. consequently, those whom he will own in the
future are not emancipated, therefore, the first becomes a mudabbar, but
not the other. The two jurists (Abü Hanifah and Muhammad) maintain
that this statement gives rise to emancipation and bequest and he will
be accommodated within one-third of the estate. In bequests the state is
awaited and the present circumstances are taken into account. Is it not
noticed that he participates in the bequest on the basis of wealth that is
acquired by the master after making the bequest, and in a bequest for the
children of so and so is the participation of children who are born after
the making of the bequest. The obligation is valid when it is associated
with ownership or with its cause. Insofar as it gives rise to emancipa-
tion, it includes the owned slave taking into account the present situation,
thus, he becomes a mudabbar so that his sale is not valid. Insofar as it
is a bequest, it includes the slave he buys taking into account the state

--- Page 851 ---

Al-Hidiyah(cid:9) 135
BOOK IX: EMANCIPATION(cid:9)
that is awaited, and this is the state of death. Prior to death, the state of
acquisition of ownership is merely the awaited future, therefore, it does
not come within the meaning of the statement. At the time of death, it
is as if he said: "Each slave that I have or each slave that I own is free."
This is different from his saying "after tomorrow' in accordance with
what has preceded. The reason is that it is a single transaction, which is
the obligation of emancipation, and it does not include a bequest. The
state is merely that of waiting for the future, thus, they are distinguished.
It cannot be said that "you have combined the present and the future'
because we would say, "Yes, but due to two separate causes: the obliga-
tion of emancipation and bequest." This, however, is not permitted due
to a single cause.

--- Page 852 ---

136 (cid:9) Al-Hidayah(cid:9) BOOK IX: EMANCIPATION

--- Page 853 ---

Chapter
81
Emancipation Through Ju 'ãlah
If a person offers to free his slave in lieu of wealth, and the slave accepts
this, he stands emancipated. This is like his saying, "You are a freeman
on one thousand dirhams of for one thousand dirhams." He is emanci-
pated due to his acceptance, because it is an exchange of wealth for what
is not wealth, for the slave does not own himself. The legal position of
exchange of counter-values is the following of legal effects immediately
upon the acceptance of the counter-value, as in a sale. Accordingly, if he
accepts he becomes a freeman, and what he has stipulated becomes a debt
for him so that providing surety for it is valid. This is different from a
counter-value in the contract of kitabah, because that is established with a
negating factor, which is the existence of bondage, as has been explained.
The unqualified use of the term wealth (mã1) includes its various types
like cash, goods, and animals without identifying the animals. The rea-
son is that it is an exchange of wealth with what is not wealth, therefore, it
resembles marriage, divorce, and settlement (sulh) for intentional homi-
cide. The same applies to food and things measured and weighed when
their species are known. It is not affected by uncertainty of description,
because it is trivial.
If he makes his emancipation contingent on the payment of wealth,
it is valid and the slave becomes an authorised slave (authorised to earn
independently). This is like his saying, "If you pay me one thousand
dirhams you are a freeman." The meaning of the words "it is valid," means
that he will be emancipated on payment of wealth without becoming a
mukãtab, because the statement is explicit in making emancipation con-
tingent upon payment, even though there is found in it a meaning of
compensation in the final analysis, as we shall elaborate, God, the Exalted,
137

--- Page 854 ---

138(cid:9) Al-Hidãyah(cid:9) BOOK IX: EMANCIPATION
willing. He becomes an authorised slave for the master prompted him to
earn by demanding payment from him, The meaning is trade and not
begging, therefore, it amounts to permission for him by implication.
If he presents wealth for payment, the qadi is to compel him to accept
it and declare the slave emancipated. The meaning of compelling here
and in all claims is that the claimant comes into possession by the mere
surrender of the wealth.' Zufar (God bless him) said that he is not to
be compelled to accept it (this way), and this is analogy as it is a trans-
action based on oath, for it is emancipation made contingent upon the
fulfilment of a condition on the basis of a statement. Consequently, it
does not depend upon the acceptance of the slave (for it is an oath of
emancipation) nor does it accept rescission, and there is no compulsion
in furthering the conditions of an oath. The reason is that there is no
entitlement prior to the coming into existence of the condition. This is
distinguished from kitãbah as that is a commutative contract in which
giving a counter-value is obligatory. We argue that it is a contingent offer
taking into account the statement, while it is a commutative contract tak-
ing into account the purpose. The reason is that he has made it contingent
only to urge the slave on to pay the wealth. The slave in return acquires
the dignity of freedom, while the master gets wealth in lieu of it as is
the case in kitãbah. It is for this reason that the compensation in case
of divorce is given through a similar form so that it becomes irrevoca-
ble. Accordingly, we have deemed it a condition from the start by acting
upon the form and for repelling injury to the master, so that he is not
prevented from selling him and the slave does not become entitled to his
earnings. Further, the emancipation does not travel down to the child
born prior to payment. We have deemed it a counter-value in the final
analysis, at the time of payment, to repel injury to the slave so that the
master is compelled to accept payment. It is this on which issues of fiqh
turn and rules are derived, and its precedent is a gift with the stipulation
of compensation. If he makes part payment, the master is compelled to
accept it, however, he is not emancipated until the entire amount is paid,
because the condition has not been fulfilled. It is as if he (the master)
has reduced part of the payment and paid the rest. Thereafter, if he pays
one thousand that he earned the master has recourse to him (for another
thousand) and he is emancipated on the basis of that amount. If he earns
'And removal of obstacles if any.

--- Page 855 ---

BOOK IX: EMANCIPATION(cid:9) Al-Hidayah(cid:9) 139
it after the stipulation, the master does not have recourse to him, because
he is an authorised slave appointed by him for the purpose of payment.
Finally, the word "pay" within his statement "if you pay" is confined to
the session as it is the granting of an option, but in his statement "when
you pay" is not confined to it, because the word "when" here is used in
the meaning of "whenever?'
If a person says to his slave, "You are free after my death for one
thousand dirhams' then acceptance is (exercised) after death, due to the
association of the offer with the time after death. It is as if he said, "You
are free tomorrow for one thousand dirhams." This is different from his
statement, "You are a mudabbar for one thousand dirhams," insofar as
acceptance has to be immediate, because the offer of tadbir is immediate,
except that the payment of wealth does not become obligatory due to the
existence of slavery. The later jurists said that he is not to be emancipated
on this account in the issue stated in the Book even if he accepts after
the death of the master, unless the heir emancipates him. The reason is
that a dead person does not have the legal capacity to emancipate. This is
correct.
He said: If a person emancipates his slave in lieu of service for four
years and the slave accepts, he is emancipated. He then dies immedi-
ately thereafter. According to Abü Ilanifah and AbU Yüsuf (God bless
them), he is liable for his value. Muhammad (God bless him) said that
he is liable for the four year value of his services. As for emancipa-
tion, the reason is that he deemed service for a determined period to be
the counter-value, therefore, emancipation is associated with acceptance,
which is found and service for four years becomes binding upon him
as it is a valid counter-value. It is as if he emancipated him for a thou-
sand dirhams. Thereafter if the slave dies then the disputed issue is based
upon another disputed case, which is that if he sells the same slave for a
female slave after which the female slave is claimed by a third party or dies
(prior to delivery), the master has the right of recourse to the slave for the
slave's value, according to the two jurists, and for the value of the slave girl
according to him (Muhammad). This issue is well known and the reason
for basing the current issue on it is that just like delivery of the slave girl
has become obstructed due to death or a third-party claim, obtaining the
services for four years is also obstructed with the death of the slave and
likewise the death of the master, therefore, it becomes a precedent for this
case.

--- Page 856 ---

140(cid:9) Al-Hidayah(cid:9) BOOK IX: EMANCIPATION
If a person says to another, "Emancipate your slave girl for a thou-
sand on the condition that you give her to me in marriage," and the man
emancipates her, but she refuses to marry him, then the emancipation
is valid and the one making the request is not liable for anything. The
reason is that if a person says to another, "Emancipate your slave for one
thousand dirhams to be paid by me' and he does that then there is no lia-
bility for payment and the emancipation is on account of the one ordered.
This is distinguished from the case where a man says to another, "Divorce
your wife for one thousand dirhams to be paid by me:' and he does that
then in this case one thousand dirhams are due from the person giving
the order, because stipulation of a counter-value for a stranger is valid in
the case of divorce, but in emancipation it is not valid. We have recorded
this earlier.
If he says, "Emancipate your female slave on my account for one
thousand dirhams," while the issue is the same, then the one thousand
are divided over her value and her reasonable dower. What is allocated
to the value is to be paid by the one ordering, and what is allocated to the
dower is deemed void. The reason is that when he said, "On my account,"
it includes purchase by legal requirement as is known. When this is the
case, then the one thousand is compensation for purchase of the slave and
for marital benefits through nikãh, therefore, it is divided over them. The
part that represents what has been delivered to him, which is the slave,
becomes due, but what has not been delivered to him becomes a nullity,
which is the benefits of marriage. In the case where she marries him is
not mentioned (in al-Jami' al-Saghir. The response is that what is allo-
cated to her value is dropped in the first case (where he did not say "on
my account"), but it belongs to the master in the second case. What is
allocated to her reasonable dower becomes her dower in both cases.

--- Page 857 ---

Chapter
82
Emancipation Upon Death of Owner (Tadbir)
If the master says to his owned slave, "When I die you are free:' or "You
are free when I turn my back (die)," or "You are a mudabbar, or "I have
made you a mudabbar' then he becomes a mudabbar. The reason is that
all these expressions are explicit for purposes of tadbir for they establish
emancipation upon death.
Thereafter it is not permitted to sell this slave nor gift him nor trans-
fer him from his ownership, except for freedom, as is the case with
kitabah. A1-Shãfi'i (God bless him) said that it is permitted, because it is
emancipation made contingent upon the fulfilment of a condition, there-
fore, sale and gift are not prevented due to it, as in all contingent stipu-
lations, and also in the case of the restricted mudabbar, because tadbir is
a bequest and it does not prevent all this. We rely upon the words of the
Prophet (God bless him and grant him peace), "The mudabbar is not to
be sold, nor gifted, nor inherited, and he is free from the third." The rea-
son is that it is the cause of freedom, because freedom is established with
death and there is no other cause besides it. Thereafter deeming it a cause
in the present is better, due to its existence in the present, and treating it as
absent after death, because what happens after death is the extinction of
the legal capacity to undertake transactions, thus, it is not proper to delay
the causation till the time of extinction of legal capacity. This is distin-
guished from all other contingent transactions,' because the obstacle for
the causation subsists prior to the fulfilment of the condition. The reason
is that it is an oath and the oath is an obstacle, while prevention is the
purpose (of this oath). Further, it is contrary to the occurrence of divorce
'It is recorded by al-Dar'qutni. A1-Zayla'i, vol. 3, 284.
A1-Sh5fi'i claims that there is no distinction.
2
141

--- Page 858 ---

142(cid:9) Al-Hidayah(cid:9) BOOK IX: EMANCIPATION
and emancipation, as it is possible to delay the causation (in the latter)
up to the time of the occurrence due to the existence of legal capacity at
the time. The transactions are, thus, distinguished. In addition to this, it
is a bequest of succession like inheritance, and declaring its cause as void
is not permitted.' This is what sale and things similar to it attempt to do.
He said: The master has the right to utilise his services or to let them
out on hire, and if it is a slave woman he has the right to cohabit with
her and he also has the right to give her away in marriage to another,
because his ownership in the slave is established for him from which he
derives the authority for these transactions.
When the master dies, the slave is emancipated from one third of
his wealth, on the basis of the tradition we have narrated. The reason
is that tadbir is a bequest as it is an act of donation associated with the
time of death. The act is not given legal effects at once, therefore, it is
executed from a third (of the estate), thus, if he does not have wealth
other than the slave, the slave is to earn the other two-thirds. If there is
a debt claim against the master, then he works for his entire value due to
the precedence that a debt has over a bequest. It is not possible to reject
the emancipation, therefore, returning the value becomes obligatory.
The child of a mudabbarah is deemed a mudabbar. The consensus of
the Companions (God be pleased with them) is recorded on this.
If he qualifies tadbir with a stipulation, like his saying, "If I die from
this illness of mine, or from my journey, or such and such illness:' then
he is not a mudabbir and his sale is permitted. The reason is that the
cause has not come into operation at present due its vacillation because
of the stipulation, as distinguished from the unqualified mudabbar as his
emancipation is related to death in the absolute meaning, which is bound
to come into existence.
If the master dies in the manner stipulated and mentioned, he is
emancipated just like a mudabbar is emancipated, which means from
a third. The reason is that the legal effects of tadbir come into being in
the last of the segments of his life for the realisation of this qualification.
Accordingly, it is taken into account from a third. Among the qualifica-
tions is his saying, "If I die within a year or in ten years," as distinguished
from his saying, "One hundred years," for no one usually lives that long.
The reason is that the shorter period is bound to come.
3Response to al-Shafi'i, who permits sale or gift of a mudabbar.

--- Page 859 ---

Chapter 83
Emancipating the Slave Mother
If a slave woman gives birth to the child of her master she becomes his
umm walad. It is not permitted to sell her or to transfer her ownership.
This is based upon the saying of the Prophet (God bless him and grant
him peace), "Her child has emancipated her." He (God bless him and
grant him peace) elaborated her emancipation with which some of the
legal implications were established, which include the prohibition of sale.
The reason is that physical participation has resulted between the two
cohabiting persons through the child, because fluids of the two mixed
together so that it is not possible to distinguish between them, as was
known in the discussion of prohibition for purposes of marriage. Total
participation, however, remains in the legal sense not in reality. This
results in the weakening of the cause (of emancipation) and it is delayed
and made legally obligatory after death. The remaining physical partici-
pation in the legal sense is in consideration of paternity that is found from
the side of men. Likewise freedom is established in their favour and not in
favour of women. Thus, if a freewoman comes to own her husband, when
she has given birth to his child, the slave whom she has come to own is
not emancipated due to her death. The proof of delayed emancipation
establishes the right to freedom immediately, therefore, it prevents the
validity of sale or moving her out of his ownership other than freedom in
the present, and it gives rise to her freedom after his death. Likewise if she
was owned in part by him, because istilãd is not divisible; it is a sub-rule
of paternity, therefore, it will be analysed on the basis of the governing
principle.
'It is recorded by Ibn Majah in his Sunan. A1-Zayla'i, vol. 3, 287.
143

--- Page 860 ---

144(cid:9) Al-Hidãyah(cid:9) BOOK IX: EMANCIPATION
He said: He has the right to have intercourse with her, to utilise her
services, make her work for wages and to give her away in marriage. The
reason is that he continues to own her, therefore, she resembles the mud-
abbarah.
The paternity of her child is not established unless he acknowledges
it. A1-Shãfi'i (God bless him) said that the paternity of the child from
him is established even if he does not claim it legally. The reason is that
if paternity can be established through contract, it should certainly be
established through intercourse, and that birth is more likely through it.
Our argument is that having intercourse with the slave woman is for the
satisfaction of carnal desire, and not procreation for which a prevention
exists (as birth is not desired). It is, therefore, necessary to make a claim
for the same legal grounds as is done for milk yamin without intercourse.
This is distinguished from the contract of marriage, because a child is
desired as the primary purpose, therefore, there is no need for filing a
claim.
If she brings forth another child after this, the paternity of this child
is established without acknowledgement. This means after acknowledge-
ment by him about the paternity of the first child. The reason is that
through the first claim it is determined that the purpose is to produce
children with her. She now becomes someone with legal access for sexual
intercourse like a woman with whom marriage is contracted. If, however,
he denies the paternity (of the later child) it stands negated through his
declaration, because the physical relationship here is weak insofar as he
possesses the right to transfer it through marriage to another. This is dis-
tinguished from the lawfully wedded wife as paternity cannot be negated
by his denial, except through li'ãn because of the strength of the marital
bond, and he does not possess the right to annul it by giving her away
in marriage. This situation that we have mentioned is on the basis of the
legal rule. As for the moral rule (between him and his Creator), if he has
had intercourse with her and has given her protection' and has not been
ejaculating outside the vagina, it is binding on him to acknowledge the
child and file a claim for it, because it is obvious that it is his child. If he
has ejaculated outside or has not been protecting her, it is permitted that
he deny the paternity of the child, because one obvious state is opposed
by another. This is how it has been transmitted from Abü Hanifah (God
'That is, he has not permitted her to go out and so on.

--- Page 861 ---

BOOK IX: EMANCIPATION(cid:9) Al-Hidãyah(cid:9) 145
bless him). There are two other narrations about it from AbU Yüsuf (God
bless him) as well as from Muhammad (God bless him), and we have
mentioned both in Kifayat al-Muntahi.
If he gives her away in marriage, and she brings forth a child, the
child has the same status as the mother, because the right to freedom
passes on to the child as in tad bir. Do you not see that the child of a
freewoman is free, while the child of a slave woman is a slave.
Paternity is established through the father. The reason is that the
right of legal access for cohabitation belongs to him, even if the marriage
is irregular, because irregularity in this case is linked to validity in con-
formity with the legal rules. If the master claims it as his child, paternity
is not established through him, because the child's paternity is already
established from another. The child, however, stands emancipated and
the mother becomes his umm walad due to his acknowledgement.
When the master dies, the umm walad will be emancipated from his
entire estate (not a third). This is based on the tradition of Sa'id ibn a!-
Musayyab (God be pleased with him) "that the Prophet (God bless him
and grant him peace) ordered that the ummahãt al-awlãd be emancipated
and not sold in lieu of a debt, and that they should not be emancipated
from a third ."3 The reason is that the need for offspring is primary, there-
fore, she will have priority over the rights of the heirs and debts like
burial, as distinguished from tad bir, because that is a bequest and that
is over and above the primary needs.
There is no labour for her in lieu of a debt of the master owed to
the creditors, due to what we have related. The reason is that she is
not marketable wealth, therefore, her compensation cannot be paid as
a consequence of abduction, according to Abü HanIfah (God bless him).
Accordingly, the right of the creditors is not linked to her as in the case of
qisãs and as distinguished from the mudabbar for he is marketable wealth.
If a Christian umm walad (owned by a Dhimmi) converts to Islam,
then she is obliged to work for her value, and she has the status of the
mukatabah, who is not emancipated until she pays the earned value.
Zufar (God bless him) said that she is to be emancipated at once and the
earned value is treated as a debt to be paid by her. The same disagreement
applies to the case where Islam is offered to the master and he refuses
31t is gha rib, but there are other traditions like it recorded by al-Dar'qutni. A1-Zayla'i,
vol. 3, 288.

--- Page 862 ---

146 (cid:9) Al-Hidayah(cid:9)
BOOK IX: EMANCIPATION
to convert. In such a case if the umm walad converts she will remain in
the same status. Zufar (God bless him) maintains that removing degra-
dation from her after she has converted is obligatory, and this can take
place through sale or emancipation. Sale becomes difficult, therefore,
emancipation is selected. We maintain that the welfare of both sides is
affirmed by considering her a mukãtabah, as this removes humiliation for
her by her becoming free immediately, while injury to the Dhimmi with
her compulsion to work for acquiring the dignity of freedom, thus, the
Dhimmi will obtain the counter-value of his ownership. If she is eman-
cipated, while she is insolvent, she will be reluctant to work. The umm
walad owned by a Dhimmi is marketable according to his belief, there-
fore, he is to be left to his rules, but even if she is not marketable wealth
she is protected, which gives rise to the liability for compensation as is
the case with a joint claim of qisas where one of the heirs has forgiven the
offender and the rest are entitled to financial compensation. If her mas-
ter dies, she is emancipated without the obligation of earning, because
she is his umm walad. If she is unable to pay during his lifetime she does
not revert to slavery. The reason is that if she does revert she becomes a
rnukãtabah due to the existence of the obligating cause (for the sake of
Islam of her child).
If a man has children through marriage with a slave girl of another
and thereafter comes to own her, she becomes his umm walad. AI-Shafi'i
(God bless him) said that she does not become his umm walad. If a man
has a child through a slave girl that he owns after which she is claimed by
a third party following which he comes to own her again, even then she
will be his umm walad, in our view. He has two views on this, and the
child is of a person deceived. He (al-Shãfi'i) argues that she conceived a
slave, therefore, she cannot be his umm walad; it is as if she conceived as
a result of zinã and then the zãni comes to own her. The reason is that
becoming an umm walad depends upon conceiving a free child, for he is
part of the mother in that state, and a part is not incompatible with the
whole. In our view, the cause is being a part (of the master), as we have
mentioned earlier, and such participation is established between them
with reference to a single child being attributed completely to both. As
paternity has been established participation is also established through
this connection. This is distinguished from zinã, because in that there is
no paternity for the child that is attributed to the fornicating father, but
the child is emancipated if such a father comes to own him, for he is part

--- Page 863 ---

BOOK IX: EMANCIPATION(cid:9) Al-Hidayah(cid:9) 147
of him in reality without a legal connection. A parallel case is that of a
person who buys his brother, who was born as a result of zinã, and who is
not emancipated. The reason is that he is attributed to him through the
relationship with the father, and that is not established.4
If a man has intercourse with a slave girl owned by his son, and she
gives birth to a child, after which he claims it as his own, the paternity is
established, while the woman becomes his umm walad. He is liable for
her value, but is liable neither for 'uqr nor for the value of the child. We
have mentioned the issue along with its evidences in the Book of Nikah
within this book. He is not liable for the value of the child as it was con-
ceived in a state of freedom, due to the association of ownership with him
prior to intercourse causing birth. If the father's father had intercourse,
while the father was alive, paternity is not established. The reason is that
the grandfather does not have wildyah while the father is still alive. If the
father is dead, it is established for the grandfather just as it is established
for the father, because of the emergence of his legal authority (wildyah)
after the loss of the father. The kufr (Unbelief) of the father or his enslave-
ment is the same as his death for it cuts off legal authority.
If a slave girl is owned jointly by two co-owners and she gives birth
to a child with one of them claiming it as his own, paternity is estab-
lished for him. The reason is that when paternity is established for his half
claim it is established for the remaining due to necessity, as paternity can-
not be divided for its cause cannot be divided, which is conception. The
reason is that one child cannot be conceived from two different sperms.
She becomes his umm walad, because producing a child is not divisi-
ble according to the two jurists. According to AbU Hanifah (God bless
him) she becomes an umm walad to the extent of his share, thereafter he
comes to acquire the share of his co-owner as that can be owned and he
is liable for half her value. The reason is that he comes to own the share
of his co-owner insofar as he is completely responsible for the birth. He
is liable to one-half of her 'uqr (compensation for unlawful intercourse),
because he had intercourse with a jointly owned slave woman. The own-
ership is established legally due to the birth and leads consequentially to
the ownership of the share of his companion. This is distinguished from
the case of the father who causes birth through the slave girl of his son,
4The slave is his brother through his father. If he was his brother through his mother,
he would be emancipated. Al-'Ayni, vol. 6,103.

--- Page 864 ---

148(cid:9) Al-Hidayah(cid:9) BOOK IX: EMANCIPATION
because the ownership in that case is established upon the condition of
birth, therefore, it is established prior to it, thus, he had intercourse with
one in his ownership. He is not liable for the value of her child, because
paternity was established by relying upon the time of conception, thus,
the conception did not take place through the ownership of his co-owner.
If both claim ownership at once, paternity is established for both.
This means that if she became pregnant within their ownership. Al-Shãfi'i
(God bless him) said that recourse is to be had to physiognomists. The
reason is that the establishing of paternity for two persons together, is
despite our knowledge that the creation of a child from two different
sperms is not possible, therefore, we acted upon physical resemblance.
The Prophet (God bless him and grant him peace), was happy with the
statement of the physiognomist in the case of Usãmah (God be pleased
with him).' We rely on the letter of 'Umar (God be pleased with him)
written to Shurayh in this case: "It has become ambiguous then it is
ambiguous for both, and if it is obvious, it is obvious for both. He is
the child of both men: he will inherit from them and they will inherit
from him, however, he will belong to the one who outlives the other."' A
similar decision is reported from 'All (God bless him).7 The reason is that
both are equal in establishing their entitlement, therefore, they are equal
in paternity. Even though paternity is not divisible, yet divisible rules are
related to it, thus, whatever accepts divisibility is established as a right for
both, and what does not accept divisibility is established for each one of
them completely as if the other does not exist. The exception is where
one of the co-owners is the father of the other co-owner or one of them
is a Muslim and the other is a Dhimmi, due to the existence of a basis for
preference, which is Islam, while in the case of the father it is his wealth on
the basis of his right in the share of his son. The happiness of the Prophet
(God bless him and grant him peace) in what is related was due to the
reason that the unbelievers used to doubt the paternity of Usãma (God
be pleased with him), and the statement of the physiognomist put an end
to this dispute, therefore, he was happy about it.
51t has been recorded by the six Imãms in their sound compilations. A1-Zayla'i, vol.
3,290.
61t is recorded by 'Abd al-Razzaq. A1-Zayla'i, vol. 3, 291.
71t is recorded by 'Abd al-Razzaq. A1-Zayla'i, vol. 3, 291.

--- Page 865 ---

BOOK IX: EMANCIPATION(cid:9) Al-Hidayah(cid:9) 149
The slave woman will become an umm walad for both, due to the
validity of the claim of both with respect to their share in the child, thus,
their shares in her render her a joint umm walad following her child.
Both are liable for one-half of the 'uqr, paid to each other from the
claim of one upon the other. The child will inherit from both of them the
inheritance of a full son, because each person has acknowledged his full
right of inheritance, and it works as a proof against him. They inherit
from him the inheritance of a single father, due to their equality with
respect to paternity, as if both had furnished the same testimony.
If the master has intercourse with the female slave of his mukatab
and she gives birth to a child with the master claiming it as his own,
paternity will be established if the mukatab deems him truthful. It is
related from Abü Yüsuf (God bless him) that he did not take into account
the confirmation of the mukatab on the analogy of the father claiming
the child of the slave girl of his son. The legal reasoning underlying the
authentic narration, which is the distinction (between the two cases with
respect to confirmation), is that the master does not possess the right to
undertake transactions in the mukãtab's earning and cannot transfer it
whereas the father does possess the right to transfer it, therefore, confir-
mation by the son is of no account.
He said: He is liable for the 'uqr paid to her, because ownership does
not precede intercourse. The reason is that whatever right of ownership
he possesses is sufficient for the validity of birth, as we will mention. He
is also liable for the value of her child. The reason is that he is within
the meaning of a child born of deception insofar as he relies upon the
evidence that the child is his due to his doing, and he does not agree to
its enslavement, thus, it will be free on payment of its value with pater-
nity attributed to him. The slave girl does not become his umm walad,
because he does not own her in reality as in the case of the child born of
deception.
If the mukatab does not confirm his claim about paternity, it is not
established. In accordance with our elaboration that his confirmation is
essential. If he comes to own her one day, his paternity will be estab-
lished, due to the existence of the cause that gives rise to it along with the
extinction of the right of the mukãtab, which is the obstacle. Allah, the
Exalted, knows best.

--- Page 866 ---

150(cid:9) Al-Hidãyah(cid:9) BOOK IX: EMANCIPATION

--- Page 867 ---

Al- Hidãyah
BOOK TEN
Aymãn
(Vows/Oaths)
Ch. 84: The Legal Status of Vows/Oaths(cid:9) 153
Ch. 85: Valid and Invalid Vows/Oaths(cid:9) 155
Sec. 1: Kaffãrah (Expiation)(cid:9) 158
Ch. 86: Vows About Entering Houses and Residing There(cid:9) 163
Ch. 87: Entering and Leaving Buildings, and Other Matters(cid:9) 167
Ch. 88: Vows About Eating and Drinking(cid:9) 171
Ch. 89: Vows About Speaking(cid:9) 179
Sec. 1: On Duration(cid:9) 182
Ch. 9o: Vows About Emancipation and Divorce(cid:9) 185
Ch. i: Vows About Sale, Purchase and Marriage(cid:9) 189
Ch. 92: Vows About Hajj, Prayer and Fasting(cid:9) 193
Ch. 93: Vows About Dresses and Jewellery(cid:9) 197
Ch. 94: Vows About Homicide and Causing Injury(cid:9) 199
Ch. 95: Vows About the Demand of Dirhams(cid:9) 201
(cid:9)
Ch. 96: Scattered Issues 203

--- Page 868 ---

152(cid:9) Al-Hidãyah(cid:9) BOOK X: VOWS/OATHS

--- Page 869 ---

Chapter 84
The Legal Status of Vows/Oaths
He said: Oaths are of three kinds: yamin ghamus,' yamin mun'aqidah
and yanin laqhw. Ghamis is an oath based on a past event by which
falsehood is intended. Through this oath, the one who takes it commits
a sin. This is based on the words of the Prophet (God bless him and grant
him peace), "One who make false oath, will be thrust by Allah into the
fire."'
There is no expiation for such an oath, except repentance and the
seeking of Allah's forgiveness. Al-Shãfi'i (God bless him) said that there
is expiation in it, for expiation has been stipulated for the removal of
sin and for violating the sanctity of the name of Allah, the Exalted. Such
violation has been established by the use of the name of Allah for a false-
hood. Thus, it resembles the yamin ma'qudah in form. We rely on the
argument that it is a pure kabirah (grave sin), while expiation is an act of
worship that is rendered with fasting and for which forming and inten-
tion is stipulated, therefore, a grave sin is not to be linked to expiation.
This is distinguished from the ma'qudah for that is permitted, and though
even there is an element of sin in it, the sin is subsequent to the oath and is
linked to a new exercise of the will (for breaking the oath). The sin in the
qhamus oath is directly associated with a grave sin, therefore, it prevents
its linkage with expiation.
The mun'aqidah is an oath taken to undertake or not to undertake
an act in the future. If he breaks such an oath he is liable for expiation.
This is due to the words of the Exalted, "Allah will not call you to account
'Yamin ghamus in simple terms is swearing to cover up falsehood.
211 is gharib in this version. The meaning, however, is recorded in other traditions
reported by al-Tabarãni and others. Al-Zayla'i, vol. 3, 292.
153

--- Page 870 ---

154(cid:9) Al-Hidãyah(cid:9) BOOK X: VOWS/OATHS
for what is void in your oaths, but He will call you to account for your
deliberate oaths,'' 3 and that is what we have mentioned.
The yamin laghw is an oath taken about a past fact under the belief
that it is the truth, but the truth is different from it. This is the oath
about which we hope that Allah will not hold accountable the person
making it. Such a null oath is like a person saying, "By Allah it was Zayd'
and he believes that it was Zayd, but it was actually 'Amr. The legal basis
of this are the words of the Exalted, "Allah will not call you to account
for thoughtlessness in your oaths, but for the intention in your hearts;
and He is Oft-Forgiving, Most Forbearing." 4 He (Muhammad (God bless
him)) has, however, associated it with hope due to the disagreement
about its interpretation.
He said: The persons making a vow intentionally, under coercion or
out of forgetfulness are all equal, so that expiation becomes obligatory
(for its violation). This is based upon the words of the Prophet (God bless
him and grant him peace), "Three things if intended seriously are taken
seriously and if said in jest are still taken seriously: marriage, divorce and
yamin."5 Al-Shãfi'i (God bless him) opposes us in this.' We will elaborate
the distinction under the topic of coercion, Allah, the Exalted, willing.
If the person undertakes the act mentioned in the oath (thus vio-
lating it) under coercion or out of forgetfulness, it is the same (as if the
violating act was intended). The reason is that a real act is not made non-
existent due to coercion, and the bringing about of the (violating) act is a
condition. Likewise if he brings about the (violating) act in a fit of faint-
ing or insanity, because of the fulfilment of the condition (of violation)
in reality. If the rationale behind the rule (of expiation) is the removal of
blame, then the legal rule turns upon its evidence, which is its violation,
and not on actual blame.7 Allah, the Exalted, knows what is correct.
3Qur'ãn 5: 89
4Qur'an 2 225
'The Author uses the word yam in in the tradition, while other jurists use the word
'atãq instead. All these are gha rib. The tradition recorded by Abü DawUd uses the word
ray'ah (retraction). Al-Zayla'i, vol. 3, 293.
'He relies on the tradition that says that the Pen (of liability) has been lifted in the
case of forgetfulness, insanity and minority.
7For there is no blame for one under a fit of fainting or of insanity.

--- Page 871 ---

Chapter 85
Valid and Invalid Vows/Oaths
He said: An oath is taken in the name of Allah, or in another name from
among the names of Allah, the Exalted, like al-Rahmãn or al-Rahim, or
by mentioning one of His attributes that are used for oaths in practice,
like the Might of Allah, His Majesty or His Greatness. The reason is that
vow by naming the attributes is known in practice, and the meaning of
the oath reflects the power that is obtained, for he believes in the Glory of
Allah and His attributes, therefore, the mentioning of Allah's name and
His attributes is suitable for urging him to act or to prevent him from
doing so.
Except that if he uses the words "By the knowledge of Allãh' then
this will not amount to a vow, because these words are not used in prac-
tice. The reason is that he uses them and means thereby what is known.
It is said: "0 Lord, forgive us what is in Your knowledge of our sins' that
is, what exists in Your knowledge.
If he says, "By the wrath of Allah and His displeasure' then he has
not made a vow. Likewise "By His mercy," because a vow with the use
of these words is not known in practice. Further, by His mercy is some-
times meant its effect, like rain or heaven, while wrath and displeasure
are intended to mean punishment.
If a person uses words meant for someone other than Allah, like,
"Prophet" or "ka'bah," he has not made a vow, due to the words of the
Prophet (God bless him and grant him peace), "When one of you makes
a vow, he should make it in the name of Allah or abstain from making
it." Likewise if he makes a vow by naming the Qur'an, because this is not
done in practice. The Author (God be pleased with him) said: This means
that he says, "Wa-al-Nabi, wa-al-Qur'an." If, however, he says, "I am free
155

--- Page 872 ---

156 (cid:9) Al-Hidayah(cid:9) BOOK X: Vows/OATHS
of both (the Prophet and the Qur'an)' then this will amount to a vow,
because being free of both amounts to kufr (unbelief).
He said: The oath employs the character used for the qasam (oath).
These characters are the "waw," as in his statement "wallãhi' the char-
acter "bã'," as in "billãhi" and the "tã'' as in "tllãhi." The reason is that
all these are already known to be used for oaths, and are mentioned in
the Qur'an.
The character is sometimes concealed through the personal pronoun
in which case he is making a valid oath, like his statement, "Allah, I
will not do such and such:' because omitting the character is among the
usage of the Arabs by way of eloquence. It is also said that while omit-
ting the character, the noun is in the accusative, and it is also said that
it is in the genitive with the lowered vowel point indicating the omission
of the character. Likewise if he says, "lillãhi" (for Allah), according to the
authentic view, because it has taken the place of the character "bã'." Allah,
the Exalted has said: "Amantum lahu (literally, "Ye believed for Him"),
that is, "Ye believed in Him."
Abü HanIfah (God bless him) said: If he says, "wa-haqqillahi," then
he has not made a valid oath. It is also the view of Muhammad (God
bless him), and one of the views of Abü Yüsuf (God bless him), but in
another narration from him it amounts to a valid oath, because Haqq is
one of the attributes of Allah, the Exalted, and it is as if he said, "Wallahi
al-haqqi," and an oath by this word is known in practice. In the opinion
of the two jurists, he intends thereby obedience to Allah, and obedience
is one of His rights, therefore, it is not a vow in the name of Allah. The
Mashã'ikh (jurists) have said that if he says, "wa-al-haqqi," it amounts to
a valid oath, but if he says, "haqqan," it is not a vow. The reason is that
al-Haqq is one of the names of Allah, while with the indeterminate he
tries to affirm his statement of promise.
If he says, "I swear:' "I swear by Allah," "I vow," "I vow in the name of
Aliãh' "I bear witness," or "I bear witness by Allah," then he has made
an oath. The reason is that these words are used for making vows, and
this form is for the present, but it is employed for the future through
the accompanying evidences, therefore, he is deemed to make a vow in
the present. Further, bearing witness is an oath. Allah, the Exalted, has
said, "When the Hypocrites come to thee, they say, 'We bear witness that
'Qur'an 20 71

--- Page 873 ---

Al-Hidyah(cid:9) 157
BOOK X: Vows/OATHS(cid:9)
"2
thou art indeed the Messenger of Allah.' Thereafter He said, "They have
made their oaths a screen (for their misdeeds)."' A vow in the name of
Allah is well known and legal, and without His name it is prohibited and
will be construed to mean this. It is for this reason that it is said that it
does not need niyyah (intention), while it is also said that it is necessary
due to the probability of it being a promise or an oath in the name of
someone other than Allah.
If he says in Farsi, "Sawgand mikhuram ba-khudä'i' it amounts to
an oath. The reason is that it is for the present. If he says, "Sawgand khu-
ram' then it is said that it does not amount to an oath. If he says in Fãrsi,
"Sawgand khurum ba-talaq zanam (I swear by the divorce of my wife)"
it does not amount to an oath, because it is not well known.
Likewise his statement la- 'amrullähi wa-aymullahi (I swear by God),
because 'amrulldh implies that Allah remains, while aymullãh means
aymunullahi, which is the plural of yamin. It is also said that it means
wallãhi (I swear by Allah). The word aym is a link like the character waw,
and an oath with both is well known. So also if he says, "The covenant
of Allah and His compact?' The reason is that compact is an oath. Allah,
the Exalted, has said, "Fulfil the Covenant of Allah, '4 The term mithãq
(compact) is an expression used to mean 'ahd (covenant).
Likewise if he says I am obliged by a nadhr (vow of consecration) or
nadhrullàh. This is based upon the words of the Prophet (God bless him
and grant him peace), "One who makes a vow of consecration (nadhr)
without naming the object, is liable for the expiation of an oath."'
If he says, "If I do such and such thing then I will be Jew or a Chris-
tian or an unbeliever' then it amounts to an oath. The reason is that
when he deemed the condition a sign of unbelief, he believed that it was
obligatory to prevent its occurrence. The statement by its creating an obli-
gation of avoiding it without the condition makes it an oath, just as you
would say in the prohibition of the permitted.' If he says this about an
act that he committed in the past then it will amount to a yam in ghamus,
and he will not fall into unbelief taking into account its operation in the
'Qur'an 63 : 1
3Qur'än 58: 16.
4Qur'an 16 : 91
The tradition is recorded by Abu Dãwud and Ibn Majah. Al-Zayla'i, vol. 3, 294.
5
Like saying, "Each permitted thing is forbidden for me." This will be considered an
6
oath. A1-'Ayni, vol. 6,131.

--- Page 874 ---

158(cid:9) Al-Hidayah(cid:9) BOOK X: Vows/OATHS
future. It is said that it will amount to unbelief because of its immediate
implication, and it is as if he said that he was a Jew. The correct view, how-
ever, is that he does not move over to unbelief in both cases if he knows
that it is an oath. If he believes that he will move to unbelief through the
oath, then he will become an unbeliever in both cases, because he con-
sented to being an unbeliever insofar as he went ahead with the act.
If he says, "If I do such and such an act then upon me is the wrath
of Allah or His displeasure:' then he has not made an oath. The reason
is that it is a supplication for himself and is not related to conditions.
Further, it is not well known. Likewise if he says, "If I do such and such
a thing, I am a fornicator or a thief or one who drinks wine or one who
consumes nba?' The reason is that the prohibition of these things admit
of abrogation7 and amendment, therefore, they are not in the meaning of
the sacredness of the name of Allah. Further, this form is not known in
practice.
85.1 KAFFARAH (ExPIATIoN)
Expiation for an oath is the emancipation of a slave, with the same types
deserving reward as they do in the case of zihar, and if he likes he can
clothe ten needy persons with one dress for each person or what is more
than that. The shortest dress is one in which prayer can be offered. If he
likes he can feed ten needy persons like the feeding in the expiation of
zihãr. The legal basis for this are the words of the Exalted, "The expiation
for it is the feeding of ten indigent persons on a scale of the average for
the food of your families; or clothe them; or give a slave his freedom. If
that is beyond your means, fast for three days."' The word "aw (or)" in
the verse is for choice, thus, the obligation is for one of the three things
mentioned.
He said: If he is not able to undertake any one of the three things,
he should fast for three consecutive days. Al-Shãfi'i (God bless him) said
that he is to be given a choice (in the days) due to the unqualified meaning
of the text. We rely on the recitation of Ibn Mas'Ud (God be pleased with
him), "The fasting of three consecutive days:' and this is like a mashhür
tradition. Thereafter, the elaboration of the shortest length of the clothing
7 Zina and sariqah do not admit of abrogation. A1-'Ayni, vol. 6 ,1 33.
8 Qur'an 5 89.

--- Page 875 ---

BOOK XVows/OATI-ls(cid:9) Al-Hidayah(cid:9) 159
mentioned in the Qur'an is narrated from Muhammad (God bless him).
It is narrated from Abü Hanifah and Abü Yüsuf (God bless them) that it is
the minimum that will cover most of his body, so that it is not permitted
to give just trousers (sarawil), and that is correct, because one who wears
just trousers is called naked in practice. If the dress given by him does not
meet the requirement of the minimum it will be deemed rewarded if its
value is equal to the food that is deemed sufficient.9
If his expiation precedes the violation of the oath, it is not rewarded.
Al-Shãfi'i (God bless him) said that he is to be rewarded for expiation on
the basis of wealth for he paid it subsequent to the arising of the cause,
which is the oath, therefore, it resembles expiation after causing an injury.
We argue that expiation is for covering up the offence, but there is no
offence here. Further, the yam in is not the cause for it is an obstacle and
does not lead to the rule, as distinguished from injury for that leads to
the rule (by causing death).
Thereafter what is paid to the needy person is not taken back from
him, because of its incidence as charity.
He said: A person who makes a vow to commit a sin (offence) like
saying that he will not pray, or will not speak with his father, or that he
will kill so and so, it is necessary that he considers himself to have vio-
lated such an oath and is to offer expiation. This is based upon the words
of the Prophet (God bless him and grant him peace), "If a person vows
to do something and then deems another act better than it, he should
commit the better act and thereafter offer expiation for his vow. The
"10
reason is that in what we have there is a loss of piety (due to not abiding
by his vow) and moving towards a compulsory act, which is expiation,
and there is no compelling factor, as opposed to this, for committing the
offence.
If an unbeliever makes a vow and then violates his vow in a state of
unbelief or after converting to Islam, there is no violation for him. The
reason is that he does not possess the legal capacity for a yamin for it is
made or the Glory of Allah, and with his unbelief he cannot uphold this.
Further, he is not eligible for expiation for that is an act of worship.
That is if it reaches the value of one-half sã' of wheat even if it is not a dress of the
9
minimum required length.
'Olt is recorded by Muslim from Abü Hurayrah (God be pleased with him). Al-Zayla'i,
vol. 3, 296.

--- Page 876 ---

16o(cid:9) Al-Hidãyah(cid:9) BOOK X: Vows/OATHS
If a person prohibits for himself something that he possesses, it does
not become prohibited, but he is under an obligation, if he makes it law-
ful for himself, to offer expiation. Al-Shãfi'i (God bless him) said that
there is no expiation for him, because prohibiting the permitted is like
inverting what is lawful, therefore, a lawful act, which is the yam in, can-
not be the subject-matter of a transaction that is unlawful. We argue
that his statement indicates the proof of prohibition and its operation
is possible for establishing it through matters external to it leading to the
establishing of the consequences of the vow, thus, resulting in its prohibi-
tion. Thereafter if he commits an act, partially or completely, from among
those that he prohibited, he violates the oath and expiation becomes
obligatory. This is the meaning of making it lawful mentioned, because
prohibition when established affects each of its constituent.
If a person says, "Each lawful thing is prohibited for me' then it
applies to eating and drinking, unless he has formed an intention for
other things. Qiyas dictates that he violates the oath the moment he com-
pletes his pronouncement, because he has committed a permissible act,
which is breathing and so on. This is the opinion of Zufar (God bless
him). The reasoning underlying istihsãn is that the purpose is piety and
it is not attained by applying it to the most general meaning. When such
application is rejected, the statement applies to eating and drinking in
the light of what is customary, as the statement is employed in practice
for what is consumed. The statement does not include his wife, except on
the basis of intention, due to the non-consideration of the most general
meaning. If he intends it, it amounts to ha', and the vow will not move
away from eating and drinking. All this is the response on the basis of
the authentic narration (zãhir al-riwãyah) . Our Mashã'ikh (jurists), God
bless them, said that a divorce occurs through it without an intention
due to the preponderance of its usage for this, and the fatwa issued on this
view. Likewise, if he says (in Fãrsi, "Halãl is harãm for me' and this on the
basis of custom. They differed about the statement (in Fãrsi), "Anything I
take in my right hand is prohibited for me' as to whether intention is to
be stipulated for this. The more authentic view is that without intention
it is to be deemed divorce on the basis of what is customary.
If a person makes a vow of consecration (nadhr) in absolute terms,
then he is under an obligation to fulfil it. This is based on the words of the

--- Page 877 ---

BOOK X: VOWS/OATHS(cid:9) Al-Hidãyah(cid:9) 161
Prophet (God bless him and grant him peace), "If a person makes a vow
of consecration and names the object, he should fulfil what he names."
If he links the vow of consecration to a condition, and the condi-
tion is found, then he must fulfil the vow itself,'2 due to the absolute
terms of the tradition, because what is suspended on a condition is one
that requires immediate performance in his view. It is narrated from AbU
Hanifah (God bless him) that he withdrew that opinion and said: If he
says, "If I do such and such thing then I am under an obligation to per-
form hajj or to fast for a year or give in charity what I own," it is to
be deemed compensated through expiation for the vow. This is also the
view of Muhammad (God bless him). He also moves out of the under-
taking by fulfilling what he mentioned in the vow. This is the case when it
is a condition that he does not desire in itself' for it contains the meaning
of prevention in it in the sense of yamin. It is on the face of it a vow of
consecration, therefore, he is given a choice between choosing any of the
two options that he likes. This is distinguished from the case where it is
a condition that he desires for itself, like saying, "If Allah gives health to
my sick?," because in this there is an absence of the meaning of a yam in,
that is, prevention. This detail is correct.
He said: If a person makes a vow and says, "If Allah wills' linking it
with his vow, then there is no violation of the vow. This is based on the
words of the Prophet (God bless him and grant him peace), "If a person
makes a vow and says, "If Allah wills," then he is absolved of his vow."4
It must, however, be linked with the vow, because after having made the
complete statement it is followed by retraction and there is no retraction
in a vow. Allah, the Exalted, knows best.
"It is gharib, however, there are other traditions about the fulfilment of nadhr that
have been recorded by al-Bukhãri. Al-Zayla'i, vol. 3, 300.
"He cannot opt for expiation due to the absolute meaning of the above tradition.
Al-'Ayni, vol. 6,143.
Like drinking khamr.
13
'h is gharib in these words. There are, however, other traditions recorded by the
Authors of the four Sunan that convey the same meaning. Al-Zayla'ii, vol. 3, 301.

--- Page 878 ---

162(cid:9) Al-Hidtyah(cid:9) BOOK X: VOWS/OATHS

--- Page 879 ---

Chapter 86
Vows About Entering Houses and Residing There
If a person makes a vow that he will not enter a room, but then enters
the Ka'bah, or a mosque, or a church or a synagogue, then he has not
violated his oath. The reason is that rooms are those that are built for
spending the night there, and these structures are not built for this pur-
pose.
Likewise if he is on the entrance of the room or under the awning
over the main door, due to what we have mentioned. The awning is usu-
ally over the side street. It is said that if the entrance is such that he will
be inside the room if the door is closed and it has a roof over it, then he
has violated his vow, because this is a place where one usually sleeps.
If he enters the ledge, he has violated his oath. The reason is that it
is built for sleeping in sometimes, therefore, it becomes like the winter
and summer enclosures. It is said that this is the case when the ledge has
enclosing walls for their ledges were made like this. It is also said that the
response is meant for the unqualified meaning, and this is correct.
If a person makes a vow that he will not enter a house, and he enters a
house that is in ruins, he does not violate his oath. If, however, he makes
a vow that he will not enter a particular house and he enters is after it is
razed to the ground and has become an open space, he violates his oath.
The reason is that the term dãr is used for the courtyard of the house both
by Arabs and non-Arabs. It is said: dãr 'ãmirah and dãr ghamirah (for
built and unbuilt houses). The poetry of the Arabs supports this meaning
(of courtyard). The structure is an additional description for it (in the
vow), except that it is redundant where the structure is present, but taken
into account where it is absent.
163

--- Page 880 ---

164(cid:9) Al-Hidayah(cid:9) BOOK X: Vows/OATHS
If he makes a vow that he will not enter this particular dãr, and it
turns into ruins and then another is built there, he violates his vow when
he enters it, on the basis of what we have said, because the name lingers
on after its collapse.
If the lot is turned into a mosque or a bath or a garden or a room,
and he enters it, he does not violate his vow. The reason is that it is no
longer a dãr due to the imposition of another name on it. Likewise if he
enters it after the razing of the bath or other structure, because it does
not revert to the name of dãr.
If he makes a vow that he will not enter this particular room, and he
does so when it is demolished and the lot has become an open space, he
does not violate his vow, because of the removal of the name room from
it, as it cannot be used for spending the night. If the walls are standing
and the roof is missing he will violate his oath as nights can be spent
there, while the roof is an additional attribute for it. Likewise if another
room is built there, he does not violate his oath upon entry. The reason
is that the name did not survive after it was demolished.
If a person makes a vow that he will not enter this particular dãr and
he stays on its roof, he violates his vow. The reason is that the roof is part
of the dãr. Do you not see that a person in i'tikaf does not invalidate it
if he goes to the roof of the mosque, therefore, it is said that he does not
violate his vow, and this is the view preferred by the faqih Abü al-Layth.
He said: Likewise if he comes into the entrance of the house. This
should be understood in terms of the detail given earlier.
If he stands in the window of the house so that if it is closed he will
not be inside, he does not violate his vow. The reason is that the door
is for enclosing the house, therefore, what is within it is not outside the
house.
If a person makes a vow that he will not enter this particular house,
and he is inside the house, he will not violate his vow by getting up,
but he will by moving out and reentering, on the basis of istihsãn. Qiyas
dictates that he has violated his vow, because staying on is assigned the
rule of commencement. The reasoning underlying istihsãn is that entry
does not have the meaning of staying on, because it is separate entry from
outside into the house.
If he makes a vow that he will never wear this particular dress when
he is wearing it, and he takes it off at once, he does not violate his vow.
Likewise if he makes a vow that he will not ride this particular animal,

--- Page 881 ---

BOOK X: VOWS/OATHS(cid:9) Al-Hidayah(cid:9) 165
when he is riding it, and then dismounts at once, he does not violate his
vow. Similarly, if he makes a vow that he will not reside in this partic-
ular house when he is living in it, and begins to vacate it immediately.
Zufar (God bless him) said that he violates his vow due to the existence
of the condition even if it is partial. We argue that ayamin is made for its
completion, therefore, the period of its realisation is exempted.
If he continues to wear the dress for some time, he violates his vow.
The reason is that all these acts are presumed to exist till a similar act is
undertaken. Do you not see that a duration is fixed for them. It is said, "I
rode for a day' and "I wore it for a day' as distinguished from entry for it
is not said, "I continued to enter for a year," in order to indicate duration
and limitation. If he resolves a pure initial wearing, he is to be deemed
truthful, because his statement probably implies this.
He said: If a person makes a vow that he will not reside in this par-
ticular house, and he then moves out without returning, while his assets
and his family are still inside, he has violated his vow. The reason is that
he will deemed to be residing in it with his assets and his family still in it,
according to custom, thus, a person operating in the market will say, "I
live in such and such street." The house and courtyard have the same sta-
tus as a house. If the vow pertains to a city, completion does not depend
upon moving assets and family according to what is narrated from Abü
Yüsuf (God bless him), because according to custom he is not counted a
resident of a city from which he has moved, as distinguished from the first
case (of the house). A village has the same status as the city (for this pur-
pose) according to the sound response. Thereafter, Abü Hanifah (God
bless him) said that it is necessary that he move all his assets, because
their remaining behind leads to violation of the vow. The reason is that
residence is established by all these things, and such residence remains as
long as any part of these remains behind. Abü Yüsuf (God bless him) said
that the major portion is taken into account, because moving everything
may sometimes be difficult. Muhammad (God bless him) said that things
that constitute his kadkhudhã'i (Fãrsi: family and servants) are taken into
account, because what is beyond this is not part of his residence. The
jurists said that this is the best view and most compassionate for the peo-
ple. It is necessary that he move to another house without delay so that
the vow is completed. If he moves out to the street or to the mosque, they
say it is not completed. The dalil (evidence) in al-Ziyãdãt is that a person
who moves from a city with his family is deemed to be the resident of that

--- Page 882 ---

166 (cid:9) Al-Hidãyah(cid:9) BOOK X: Vows/OATHS
land for purposes of prayer until he takes up residence in another land.
Likewise here. Allah knows best.

--- Page 883 ---

Chapter 87
Entering and Leaving Buildings, and Other
Matters
He said: If a person makes a vow that he will not leave the mosque, but
he then orders someone who carries him out, then he has violated his
vow. The reason is that the act of the person ordered is attributed to the
one giving the order. It is as if he mounted an animal and moved out.
If he is moved out under duress he has not violated his vow, because
the act is not transferred to him due to the absence of an order. If he is
carried out with his consent, but not his order, he does not violate his
oath, according to the authentic narration, because transferring of the
act to him is through a command and not mere consent.
If he makes a vow that he will not leave his house except for a funeral,
and then he goes out for a funeral, but thereafter he attends to another
need (while he is out), he does not violate his vow by doing so. The rea-
son is that the present going out is exempted and going to a place after
that does not amount to going out.
If he makes a vow that he will not go out to Makkah after which he
goes out intending to go there, but turns back, he has violated his vow,
as he has gone out with the intention of going to Makkah, which is the
condition, because exit means moving from within and going out.
If he makes a vow that he will not visit Makkah, he will not violate his
vow unless he enters Makkah. The reason is that this is an expression for
reaching. Allah, the Exalted, has said, "So come, both of you, to Pharaoh,
and say:" If he makes a vow that he will not go to it, then it is said that
'Qur'an 26:16
167

--- Page 884 ---

168(cid:9) Al-Hidayah(cid:9) BOOK X:VOWS/OATHS
this is in the meaning of visiting, while it is said that it is like going out,
which is correct as it is an expression for leaving.
If he makes a vow that he will certainly visit Basrah, but he does not
do so till he dies, then he has violated his vow in the last moment of his
life for it was possible to fulfil it prior to this.
If he says to another, "I will certainly visit you tomorrow if! am able
to' then this is to be construed to mean ability with respect to health and
not normal ability. It has been elaborated in al-Jami' al-Saghir, where he
(Muhammad) said: If he is not unwell, or the sultan has not prevented
him, or some other event has not taken place that deprives him of the
ability to visit him, he has violated his vow. If he intended the ability
of qada' (that is, if destined to come) then the matter is between him
and Allah, the Exalted. This is so as the reality of ability accompanies
the act. The unqualified term includes the safety of limbs and the sound-
ness of means that are so in practice. Thus, an unqualified use of the
term will be interpreted in this meaning. Intending the first meaning is
morally correct as well, for he intended the true meaning of the words
used. Thereafter it is said that the statement is sound in the sense of qada'
as well, as we have elaborated, but it is also said that it is not sound as it
goes against the apparent meaning.
If a person makes a vow that his wife will not go out without his
permission, and he permits her once and she goes out, but then she goes
out another time without his permission, he has violated his vow. In this
situation it is necessary to take permission for going out each time. The
reason is that the exempted exit is linked with permission and what is
beyond that is covered by general prohibition. If he intended permission
just once, he is to be deemed truthful morally, but not legally, because it
probably includes this meaning, nevertheless it goes against the apparent
meaning.
If he says (in the previous statement), "Unless I permit you," and
then permits her once and she goes out, but thereafter goes out again
without his permission, he has not violated his vow. The reason is that
this phrase is for a limited meaning, therefore, the oath terminates with
it (permission). It is as if he said, "Till such time that I permit you."
If the wife of a person intends to go out, but he says to her, "If you
go out you are divorced' after which she sits down for a while, and
then goes out, then he has not violated his vow. Likewise where a per-
son decides to beat his slave, and another person says to him, "If you beat

--- Page 885 ---

Al-Hidayah(cid:9) 169
BOOK X: VOWS/OATHS(cid:9)
him, then my slave is a freeman." He holds back for a while after which he
beats him. This type of vow is known as ayaminfawn It was Abü Hanifah
(God bless him) alone who gave expression to it. The underlying reason-
ing is that in practice the intention of the person making the intervening
statement is to prevent the beating and going out, and (statements of)
oaths/vows are based on practice.
If a man says to another, "Sit down and have lunch with me' and the
other says, "If I have lunch my slave is a freeman," after which he goes
out and returns to have lunch, he has not violated his vow. The reason
is that his statement was made in response to the invitation, therefore, it
will be construed for that invitation and applied to the lunch to which he
was invited. This is distinguished from the case where he says, "If I have
lunch today," as in this he has gone beyond the response, therefore, it will
be considered as an independent statement.
If a person vows not to ride an animal of such and such person, but
then rides an animal belonging to the authorised slave (of such person),
whether or not this man is indebted, he has not broken his vow, accord-
ing to Abü IIanifah (God bless him). He does not violate his vow when
the debt exceeds assets even when he included the animal owned by his
slave in his intention as this person does not have any ownership in the
slave. If, however, the debt does not exceed the assets or he does not have
any debt, then he does not break his vow as long he does not include
the slave's animal in his intention as his ownership in the slave subsists,
however, it is customary to attribute ownership to the slave, therefore,
it is done legally as well. The Prophet (God bless him and grant him
peace) said, "If a person buys a slave and he has wealth, then it belongs to
the buyer."' Consequently, attributing ownership to the master becomes
doubtful, therefore, it is necessary to stipulate intention. Abü Yftsuf (God
bless him) said that in all these situations he breaks his vow if he had such
intention due to the ambiguity in attributing ownership. Muhammad
(God bless him) said that he breaks his vow even if he did not have such
intention taking into account the reality of the ownership. The reason is
that a debt does not eliminate ownership in the option of the two jurists.
2ft is recorded by all the six sound compilations. Al-Zayla'i, vol. 3, 304.

--- Page 886 ---

170(cid:9) Al-Hidayah(cid:9) BOOK X: VOWS/OATHS

--- Page 887 ---

Chapter 88
Vows About Eating and Drinking
He said: If a person makes a vow not to eat of a particular date palm,
then his statement applies to its fruit. The reason is that he associated his
vow with something that is not eaten, therefore, it is construed to apply
to what grows out of it, that is, its fruit, because the tree is the cause for
it. Accordingly, it is the figurative meaning that is suitably used for it,
however, the condition is that the fruit is not altered into something new
so that he does not break his vow by using mead, vinegar and what is
cooked.
If he makes a vow that he will not eat these unripe dates, but he eats
them when they ripen, he will not be breaking his vow. Likewise if he
says that he will not eat from these ripe dates or drink this milk and the
dates turn into dry dates, the milk into thick paste, he will not violate his
vow. The reason is that the qualities of being unripe and ripe are the basis
of the vow, likewise its existence as milk, therefore, it will be restricted to
them. The reason is that milk is consumable, therefore, the vow will not
be interpreted to apply to what is extracted from it. This is distinguished
from the case where he vows that he will not speak to this minor or this
young man, but he does speak to him after he grows old (he will break his
vow), because cutting off relations with a Muslim by ceasing to speak to
him is prohibited according to the shari'ah, therefore, the cause will not
be deemed a cause according to the shari'ah.
If he vows not to eat the meat of this very young lamb, but he eats
of it when it becomes a ram, he will be breaking his vow, because the
attribute of being small is not the basis of the vow. The reason is that the
prohibition of what is prohibited is greater than the prohibition of ram
meat.
171

--- Page 888 ---

172(cid:9) Al-Hidãyah(cid:9) BOOK X: VOWS/OATHS
He said: If a person vows not to eat unripe dates and eats ripe dates
he has not broken his vow, because they are not unripe.
If a person vows not to eat unripe or ripe dates, or he vows to eat
neither unripe dates nor ripe dates, but then eats partially ripe (two
coloured) dates, he breaks his vow according to AbU Hanifah (God bless
him). The two jurists said that he does not break his vow by eating ripe
dates, that is, by saying ripe and eating partially ripe dates and by say-
ing unripe and eating partially unripe dates. The reason is that partially
unripe dates are called ripe and partially ripe dates are called unripe dates.
It is as if the vow was about buying such dates. He (Abü Hanifah (God
bless him)) argues that partially unripe dates are those that have a small
unripe part at the tail, while partially ripe dates are those that are the
opposite, thus, one who eats them has eaten unripe and ripe dates, and
each of these is intended for consumption, as distinguished from buying
as that applies generally and the partially follows the fully ripe.
If he makes a vow not to buy ripe dates, but he buys a bunch of dates
in which there are ripe dates, he has not broken his vow. The reason is
that purchase applies to the whole and the predominant prevails. If the
vow pertained to eating, he would have broken his oath, because eating
applies gradually to small parts, therefore, the dates in their entirety are
intended. It becomes as if he vowed not to buy barley or not to consume
it, and he buys wheat in which their are grains of barley and he consumes
it, he breaks the vow with respect to eating but not buying, on the basis
of what we said.
He said: If a person makes a vow that he will not eat meat, but then
eats fish meat, he does not break his vow. Analogy dictates that he does
break it, because it has been called meat in the Qur'an. The basis for
istihsãn is that this use of the term is figurative as lahm is produced from
blood and there is no blood in them due to their existence in water. If
he consumes swine flesh or human flesh, he breaks his vow, because it
is lahm in reality except that it is forbidden, and an oath is constituted
validly for avoiding something that is prohibited. Likewise if he consumes
liver or tripe. The reason is that it is lahm in reality and grows through
blood. Further, it is used in the place of meat. It is said that he will not
break his vow as in our custom it is not treated as meat.
He said: If he makes a vow that he will not eat or buy fat, he will
not break his vow except in the case of fat around the stomach (of the
animal), according to AbU Hanifah (God bless him). The two jurists said

--- Page 889 ---

A1-Hidayah(cid:9) 173
BOOK X: VOWS/OATHS(cid:9)
that he will break it due to the fat from the animal's back. It is fatty meat
due to the existence of fat in it, which melts over fire. The Imãm argues
that it is meat in reality. Do you not see that it grows through blood and
is used as meat for deriving strength from it. Consequently, he breaks his
vow by eating it with respect to a vow about meat, but he does not violate
his vow by selling it in a vow about selling meat. It is said that this is based
upon the Arabic language, but in Farsi the word peh does not apply in any
way to the fat in the back of the animal.
If he makes a vow that he will not buy, or not eat, meat or fat, but
then he buys the fat tail of a sheep, or eats it, he does not break his vow,
because it is a third type and is not used as a substitute for meat or fat.
If he makes a vow not to eat from a particular lot of wheat, he will
not break his vow until he chews the wheat. If he eats bread made of
this wheat, he will not break his vow, according to AbU Hanifah (God
bless him). The two jurists said that he will break his vow even if he
eats bread made of the wheat, because it falls within its comprehended
meaning in practice. According to Abü Hanifah (God bless him) it has
an independent reality in use for it is boiled and roasted and chewed, and
this meaning governs the figurative customary meaning on the basis of
the rule preferred by him. If he chews it, he breaks his vow according to
the two jurists, and this is correct due to the generality of the figurative
meaning. It is just as if he says that he will not put a foot in the house of
so and so. It is this (general meaning) towards which the opinion points
when it says that he will break his vow if he eats its bread.
If he makes a vow that he will not eat of this flour, but he eats of its
bread, he breaks his vow, because the flour itself cannot be eaten, there-
fore, it applies to what is derived from it. If he swallows the flour as it is,
he will not break his oath, which is correct, as it gives way to the figurative
meaning.
If he makes a vow not to eat bread, then his vow will apply to what the
residents of the city, according to their custom, consider eating bread.
This is bread made of wheat and barely as that is what is customary in
most lands. If he eats bread of qata'if (triangular doughnuts made in
butter), he does not break his vow, as they are included in the meaning
of bread in its broad meaning, unless he included them in his intention,
for his statement probably implies this. Likewise if he eats rice bread in
Iraq, he will not violate his vow, because it is not part of their practice,

--- Page 890 ---

174(cid:9) Al-Hidayah(cid:9) BOOK X: VOWS/OATHS
but if he was in Tabirsistan or another land where it is consumed as bread,
he will violate it.
If he makes a vow that he will not eat grilled food it will apply to
meat and not to eggplant or carrots. The reason is that in its unqualified
meaning it applies to grilled meat, unless he includes in his intention
all things that can be roasted like eggs and other things so that the true
meaning of his statement is given effect.
If he vows not to eat cooked food, then this applies to meat that
is cooked. This is based upon istthsãn keeping customary practice into
account. The reason is that giving it a very general meaning is difficult,
therefore, it will be applied to what is specific and well known, which is
food cooked in water. The exception is where he includes other things
in his intention for it amounts to going to extremes. If he consumes the
curry/gravy of this meat even then he will be violating his vow insofar as
it contains constituents of meat, it is called cooked food.
If a person makes a vow that he will not eat heads (skulls), his vow
will be applied to those that are buried in clay ovens and sold in the
market. These are called yuknas. In al-Jami' al-Saghir the statement is
that if a person vows that he will not eat a head (skull), it will be applied
to heads of cows and goats, according to AbU klanifah (God bless him).
Abu YUsuf and Muhammad (God bless them) said that it applies only
to sheep. This is a difference of periods and times, and the customary
practice in his times was for the two types, while in their period it applied
to sheep alone. In our times, the fatwa is to be issued in accordance with
practice, as is mentioned in al-Mukhtasar.
He said: If a person makes a vow that he will not eat fakihah (fruit),
but he eats grapes or pomegranates or moist dates or cucumbers, he
does not violate his vow. If he eats apples or melon or apricots, he does
violate it. This is the view according to AbU Hanifah (God bless him).
Abu Yüsuf and Muhammad (God bless them) said that he does violate
it by also eating grapes, moist dates and pomegranates. The basis is that
the term fakihah is applied to what is enjoyed before a meal and after it,
that is, it is consumed in excess of the normal meal by way of appetis-
ers. In this dry and fresh things are equal after having enjoyed them in
the usual manner, thus, by having dried melon, he does not violate his
vow. This meaning is present in an apple and its species, therefore, he
violates his vow by eating them. The meaning is not found in a water-
melon and cucumber, as these are more like vegetables with respect to

--- Page 891 ---

BOOK X: VOWS/OATHS(cid:9) A1-Hidãyah(cid:9) 175
sale and consumption, thus, he does not break his vow with them. In the
case of grapes, moist dates and pomegranates, the two jurists say that the
meaning of additional enjoyment is present in them as these are the most
sought after fruits and enjoyed more than other fruits. Abü llanifah (God
bless him) says that these are things that provide nutrition and are used
as medicines. It leads to deficiency in the meaning of enjoyment through
their use in one's need for survival. Consequently, the dried fruits from
among them are used as condiments or basic food.
He said: If a person makes a vow that he will not eat idam (anything
eaten with bread)' then each thing that alters the colour of bread is idam,
but roasted meat is not idam, while salt is idam. This is the view accord-
ing to AbU Hanifah and AbU Yüsuf (God bless them). Muhammad (God
bless him) said that each thing usually eaten with bread is idam. This is
also a narration from AbU Yüsuf (God bless him). The reason (accord-
ing to Muhammad) is that the term idam is from muwãdamah, which
means compatibility. Each thing that is eaten with bread is compatible
with it, like meat and eggs and the like. The two jurists argue that idãm
is something that is eaten as a secondary item, and the meaning of being
secondary in a mixed form is found in reality in these, and when con-
sumed independently the meaning is found in the legal sense. Complete
compatibility depends upon absorption as well. Vinegar and other liq-
uids are not eaten alone but are drunk, while salt is not eaten separately
in practice as it dissolves, therefore, it is secondary. This is different from
meat and other similar things for these are eaten separately. The excep-
tion is where he includes them in his intention insofar as this would be an
extreme case. Grapes and melon are not idam, which is the correct view
(out of different views).
If a person vows not to have ghada' (breakfast/lunch), then ghada'
is between the morning prayer up to zuhr prayers, while 'ashã' (din-
ner/supper) is between the zuhr prayer up to midnight. The reason is
that the meal after the declining of the sun is 'ashã'. It is for this reason
that the zuhr prayer is referred to in a tradition as one of the two prayers
of 'ishã'. Suiür is between midnight and the rising of the sun. As it is
derived from the word sal-zr and is applied to what is close to it. There-
after ghada' and 'ashä' are meals that are intended to satisfy appetite. The
'The word idam has a very wide meaning. It includes things like vinegar, oil, honey,
butter, milk, salt and curry.

--- Page 892 ---

176 (cid:9) Al-Hidãyah(cid:9) BOOK X: Vows/OATHS
practice of the residents of each land is taken into account for them, but
it is stipulated that the meal satisfy at least one-half of the appetite.
If a person says, "If I wear, eat or drink, then my slave is free' but
then adds, "I meant some things and not others?' He is not to be deemed
truthful legally or otherwise. The reason is that intention is valid in
association with the expression, when a dress or other things are not men-
tioned. A thing implied has no generality, therefore, an intention making
it specific becomes redundant. If he says, "If I wear a dress or eat food or
drink a beverage (liquid)," he is not to be deemed truthful adjudication
alone. The reason is that it is an indefinite noun used for a condition,
therefore, it becomes general and the restrictive intention operates on
it, except that it goes against the apparent meaning, thus, it will not be
deemed true for adjudication.
If he makes a vow that he will not drink from the Dijlah (Tigris)
River, but he drinks its water in a utensil, he has not broken his vow,
until he sips water from the river, according to Abü Hanifah (God bless
him). The two jurists said that if he drinks from it with the help of a uten-
sil he has broken his vow as that is the commonly understood meaning.
The Imãm argues that the word min is used for divisibility and the true
meaning here is in sipping and this is the usage. Accordingly, he breaks
his vow on the basis of consensus, and transferring the meaning to its
figurative sense is prevented even if it is well known.
If he says that he will not drink of the water of the Tigris, but then
drinks from its water with the help of a utensil, he breaks his vow. The
reason is that even after scooping up the water it remains attributed to
the river, and that is the condition. It is as if he has drunk from a canal
that has been taken out from the river.
If a person says, "If I do not drink today the water that is in this jar,
then my wife is divorced' but there is no water in the jar, then he does
not violate the vow. If there is water in the jar, but is spilt prior to the
arrival of the night, he does not violate his vow. This is the view accord-
ing to AbU Hanifah and Muhammad (God bless them). AbU Yüsuf (God
bless him) says that he breaks his vow in both cases, that is, after the
day is over. On the same disagreement is analysed the case where the vow
is sworn in the name of Allah, the Exalted. The basis is that a condi-
tion of the vow becoming effective and its continuance is the concept of
completion in the opinion of the two jurists, with AbU Yüsuf (God bless

--- Page 893 ---

BOOK X: Vows/OATHS(cid:9) Al-Hidãyah(cid:9) 177
him) disagreeing. The reason is that a yamin is formulated for comple-
tion, therefore, such completion must be found in order to give effect to
it. He (Abü Yüsuf) argues that it is possible to say that it is effective lead-
ing to completion in a manner that affects the substitutory duty, which
is expiation.' We would say that it is necessary that the original duty be
conceivable so that it can operate on the substitutory duty. It is for this
reason that the yam in ghamus does not become effective for purposes of
expiation.
If the vow was absolute, then in the first situation, he does not break
it in the opinion of the two jurists, but according to AbU Yüsuf (God
bless him) he violates it immediately. In the second case he breaks his
vow in the opinion of all three jurists. Abü Yüsuf (God bless him) makes
a distinction between the absolute and one limited by time. The reasoning
underlying the distinction is that limitation of time is to provide space,
thus, the act does not become obligatory except in the last segment of the
time. Accordingly, he does not break the vow prior to this. In the case
of the absolute vow it is necessary to fulfil it as soon as he is free of the
pronouncement. In this case he is unable to do so, therefore, he breaks
the vow at once. The two jurists also distinguish between the cases and
the reasoning for the distinction is that in the absolute vow he is required
to fulfil it as soon as he ends the statement, but as the fulfilment is lost
due to the loss of the object of the vow, he breaks his vow as if the person
making the vow dies while the water remains. As for the vow limited by
time, fulfilment is obligatory in the last segment of the time and at this
time the object of completion does not remain due to the absence of its
conception, therefore, fulfilment is no longer obligatory in it, and the vow
is annulled. It was as if he made the vow initially in this state.
He said: if a person makes a vow that he will rise up into the sky or to
convert this stone into gold, his vow has become effective and he breaks
it immediately thereafter. Zufar (God bless him) said that it does not
become effective for it pertains to what is usually impossible, therefore,
it is the same as what is impossible in reality. Thus, it does not become
effective. We argue that fulfilment is possible in reality, because rising into
the sky is possible in reality. Do you not see that the angels rise up into
the sky, likewise a stone is turned into gold when converted by Allah, the
Exalted. If it can be conceived it becomes effective for purposes of the
'Because it pertains to an act in the future.

--- Page 894 ---

178(cid:9) Al-Hidyah(cid:9) BOOK X: Vows/OATHS
substitutory duty. Thereafter, he breaks it through the ruling of inability
that is established in practice, like the person making the vow dying, for
he breaks his vow despite the possibility of life returning. This is different
from the issue of the jar (stated above), because the drinking of water
at the time of making the vow, when there is no water in it, cannot be
conceived and thus cannot become effective.

--- Page 895 ---

Chapter 89
Vows About Speaking
He said: If a person makes a vow that he will not speak with so and so,
then he speaks to him in a manner that the person can hear him though
he is asleep, he has broken his vow. The reason is that he spoke to him
and his voice reached him, but he did not understand due to sleep. It is as
if he called out to him so that he could hear him, but he did not under-
stand due to inattention. In some versions of al-Ma bsüt the condition is
stipulated that he wake him up. The majority of our Mashã'ikh (jurists)
uphold this. The reason is that if he does not draw his attention it will be
as if he called out to him from a distance and he is in a situation where he
cannot hear him.
If he makes a vow that he will not speak to him except with his per-
mission, and he permits him, but he is not aware of his permission till
he speaks with him, he has broken his vow. The reason is that the term
idhn is derived from adhän, which is a notification or it is derived "from
falling into the ears' and all this is not realised without hearing. Aim
YUsuf (God bless him) said that he has not broken his vow, because per-
mission is release, and it is complete with permission like consent. We say
that consent is an inner act, but permission is different from this as has
preceded.
He said: If he makes a vow that he will not speak with him for a
month, then the time begins from the time of the vow. The reason is
that if he does not mention the month, the vow will become perpetual.
The mentioning of the month is for excluding what is beyond the month.
What remains following his vow is within it taking into account the state
he is in (possible anger). This is distinguished from the situation where
he says, "By Allah, I will fast for a month." The reason is that if he does
179

--- Page 896 ---

18o(cid:9) A1-Hidãyah(cid:9) BOOK X: Vows/OATHS
not mention the month, the vow will not become perpetual. Mention-
ing it will be for determining the fasts through it. As it is indefinite, the
determination is left to him.
If a person makes a vow that he will not speak, but then he recites the
Qur'an in his prayer, he does not break his vow, however, by reciting it
outside the prayer he will break his vow. The same rule applies to tasbih,
tahlil and takbir. Analogy dictates that he breaks the vow in both cases,
which is also the view of al-Shãfi'i (God bless him), because recitation
is speech in reality. We argue that in prayer it is not treated as speech
either in customary understanding or according to the shar' (law). The
Prophet (God bless him and grant him peace) said, "For this prayer of
ours, nothing that pertains to the speech of humans is suitable." It is also
said that according to our custom he does not break the vow even while
reciting outside prayer for in that case he is referred to as a reciter and
one glorifying the greatness of Allah.
If he says, "The day I speak to so and so, my wife stands divorced,"
then the day will mean day and night. The reason is that in the term
"day" when it is associated with an act that does not extend over time,
the intention is that it is unqualified. Allah, the Exalted, has said, "If any
do turn his back to them on such a day,"' The speech is not extended
either. If he had formed an intention that it pertains to the day alone,
then he will be deemed truthful for adjudication. The reason is that the
statement is used to mean this as well. It is narrated from Abü YUsuf
(God bless him) that he is not to be deemed truthful as it goes against the
well known meaning. If he says, "The night I speak to him....." then it
is construed to mean night specifically. The reason is that it is the true
meaning for the darkness of the night just as brightness is for the day
specifically. The word night is not used in the absolute sense so as to be
independent of time.
If a person says, "If I speak with so and so, my wife is divorced, unless
so and so comes or until so and so comes, or unless so and so gives per-
mission or until so and so gives permission," following which he speaks
'The tradition has preceded in the topic of factors annulling prayer. Al-Zayla'i, vol. 31
304. The words there were: "In this prayer of ours no part of human speech is valid for it
is glorification, the proclamation of God's greatness and the recitation of the Qur'an." It
is recorded by Muslim in his Sahih, and other versions by al-Bukhari and al-Dar'qutni.
AI-Zayla'i, vol. 2, 66.
2 Qur'an 8: 16

--- Page 897 ---

BOOK X: VOWS/OATHS(cid:9) A1-Hidayah(cid:9) 181
with him prior to the person's arrival and permission, then he breaks his
vow. If he speaks with him after his arrival and permission, he does not
break his vow, because that is the limit, and the oath continues prior
to the limit and ends after it. Thus, he does not violate the vow after
the termination of the yam in. If the person named (so and so) dies, the
vow lapses. AbU Yftsuf (God bless him) disagrees with this. The reason
is that the prohibited thing is speech, which ends with permission and
arrival, and after death such termination cannot be conceived to exist,
therefore, the yam In lapses. According to his view such conception is not
a condition, therefore, upon the cessation of the limit the yamin becomes
perpetual.
If a person makes a vow that he will not speak to some other person's
slave, but he does not identify a specific slave in his intention. He may
also say he will not speak to some other person's wife, or friend. There-
after such other person sells his slave, or irrevocably divorces his wife or
develops enmity with his friend, and he speaks to one of them, he has not
broken his vow. The reason is that his vow has been made with respect
to an act that operates on a subject-matter that is attributed to another
person, either to his ownership, or to his relations, and such an act is
not found, therefore, he does not break his vow. The Author (God be
pleased with him) said: There is agreement when the act is attributed to
his ownership, but where it is attributed to his relations then according to
Muhammad (God bless him) he breaks his vow, that is, in the case of the
wife and friend. He says in al-Ziyãdãt that this association is merely for
identification, because the purpose is not to speak to his wife or friend,
therefore, the permanent association is not stipulated. Thus, the hukm
will apply to their persons as if he had pointed towards them. The basis
for what is mentioned here (in the matn) is the narration in al-Jãmi' al-
Saghir, and the reasoning is that it is probable that the cessation of speech
was intended for this man himself, therefore, he did not identify a spe-
cific slave. Consequently, he does not break his vow after the elimination
of such association on the basis of doubt.
If his vow pertains to a specific slave, that is, if he says, "Such and
such slave' or "Such and such wife' or "Such and such friend' he does
not break his vow in the case of the slave, but he does break his vow in the
case of the wife and the friend. This is the opinion of AbU Ilanifah and
AbU Yüsuf (God bless them). Muhammad (God bless him) said that he
breaks his vow with respect to the slave as well. This is the view of Zufar

--- Page 898 ---

182(cid:9) Al-Hidàyah(cid:9) BOOK X: VOWS/OATHS
as well (God bless him). If he makes a vow that he will not enter this
house of so and so, and that person sells it, after which he enters it, then
it is governed by the same disagreement. The reasoning for the view of
Muhammad and Zufar (God bless them) is that attributing things to him
here is for identification. Pointing out, however, is more explicit here for
it cuts of participation of other persons,' as distinguished from attribut-
ing in an unspecified way. Accordingly, pointing out is taken into account
and general association becomes superfluous, so the slave becomes like
the friend and wife. The two jurists (AbU Ilanifah and Abfr Yfrsuf (God
bless them)) argue that the reason for the vow is some meaning that
is found in the person mentioned, because avoidance and rejection of
these things (animals, houses and so on) is not undertaken for their own
attributes. Likewise the slave due to his reduced status. In truth it is for
a meaning found in one who owns them, therefore, the vow is qualified
with the state of existence of ownership. This is distinguished from the
case where the reference is to an association of relationship like the friend
and wife for enmity may be for their own persons in which case the asso-
ciation is for identification and the underlying reason for the vow being a
meaning in the man is less evident here due to the lack of ascertainment,
as distinguished from what has preceded.
He said: If a person makes a vow that he will not speak to the owner of
this covering (shawl), but he sells it, after which he speaks to him, he has
broken his vow. The reason is that this association does not imply any-
thing other than identification, because a human being does not develop
an enmity due to a head-covering (shawl). It is as if he had pointed to the
person himself.
If a person says, "I will not speak with this young man:' but he speaks
to him when he grows older, he breaks his vow. The reason is that the
hukm is linked to the person pointed to as his attributes at the present
time are superfluous. Further, this quality is not the basis of the vow,
according to the explanation that has preceded earlier.
89.1 ON DURATION
He said: If a person makes a vow saying, "I will not speak with him for a
time (hin)," or "I will not speak with him for some time (zamiin)," or "I
'That is, the probability of some other slave, wife, friend or house.

--- Page 899 ---

Al-Hidayah(cid:9) 183
BOOK X: Vows/OATHS(cid:9)
will not speak with him for a time or some time," then it is construed to
mean six months. The reason is that the word hin is sometimes applied to
a short period, and sometimes it means forty years. Allah, the Exalted, has
said, "Has there not been over Man a long period of Time (hin),"4 which
could mean six months (gestation),' and Allah, the Exalted, has said, "It
brings forth its fruit at all times (hin)."6 This (six months) is the middle
period, therefore, the meaning is directed towards it. The reason is that a
very small period is not intended for prevention, because such prevention
may exist under normal circumstances. A perpetual period is not usually
intended, because that implies forever, and had he not mentioned it, it
would have meant forever. Accordingly, the period we have mentioned
is identified. Likewise the words zamãn is used in the meaning of hin.
It is said, "I have not seen you for a hin or for some time" in the same
meaning. All this applies when he has not formed an intention. If he did
intend something then the period is as he intended for he meant what he
said in reality.
Likewise if he uses the word dahr (time), according to the two jurists.
Abü Hanifah (God bless him) said: Dahr, I do not know what that
means. This disagreement lies in using it as an indefinite noun, which is
correct. If it is made definite by the use of alif and lam (al-), then it means
eternity according to the customary meaning. The two jurists maintain
that the word dahr is used in the meaning of hin. It is said, "I have not
seen you since a hin or dahr' to imply the same meaning. Abü Hanifah
(God bless him) suspended his judgement in determining a period for it,
because languages are not understood on the basis of analogy. Further,
usage does not last long enough due to its changing meaning.
If he makes a vow that he will not speak to him for days, then it will
be construed to mean three days. The reason is that it is a plural used
as an indefinite noun, therefore, it includes the minimum used for the
plural and that is three. If he makes a vow that he will not speak to him
for al-ayyam, then it is taken to mean ten days, according to Abü Hanifah
(God bless him). The two jurists said that it will be taken to mean the
days of the week. If he makes a vow that he will not speak to him for
months, then it is taken to mean ten months in his view, but in their
4Qur'an 14: 25
5 Some commentators have said it means forty years. A1-'Ayni, vol. 6, 204. But see
AbU Hanifah's view below.
6Qur'an 14: 25

--- Page 900 ---

184(cid:9) Al-Hidãyah(cid:9) BOOK X: Vows/OATHS
opinion it is twelve months, because the character lam is meant for what
is previously known, and that is what we mentioned for the issue turns
on it. According to him it is a definite plural and will be applied to the
maximum that is included in the plural, and that is ten. The reply is the
same in his view for the plural "years?' According to the two jurists it
will apply to his entire life, because there is no previously familiar period
other than this.
If a person says to his slave, "If you serve me for a large number
of days, then you are free' then "large number of days' according to
AbU Hanifah (God bless him) are ten days. The reason is that this is the
maximum implied by the word "days (al-ayyãm)." The two jurists say
that it means seven days, because what exceeds this is repetition. It is said
that if the vow is in Fãrsi, it is taken to mean seven days, because it is
mentioned with a singular and not a plural. Allah knows what is correct.

--- Page 901 ---

Chapter
90
Vows About Emancipation and Divorce
If a person says to his wife, "If you give birth to a child, you are divorced'
and she does give birth to a dead child, then she is divorced. Likewise if
he says to his slave woman, "If you give birth to a child, you are free?'
The reason is that what exists is a child born in fact, and is called by this
name in common usage. Further, it is considered a child in the law (shar')
insofar as 'iddah is terminated by its birth, the bleeding following birth
is called nifas, and the mother (if she is a slave) is called an umm walad.
Thus, the condition is complete, which is the birth of the child.
If he says to her, "When you give birth to a child, the child is free'
then she gives birth to a stillborn child followed by another who is alive.
The one alive is alone deemed free, according to AbU Hanifah (God bless
him). The two jurists said that none of them is free, because the con-
dition is fulfilled by the birth of the dead child, as we have explained.
The yam in, thus, lapses without the effect of its consequences upon the
subject-matter. The dead child is not a subject-matter of freedom, and the
child is the consequence. Abfl Hanifah (God bless him) argues that the
unqualified use of the term is qualified with the attribute of life, because
the person making the vow intended the establishment of freedom as a
consequence, which is a legal power that emerges for repelling the author-
ity of another person. This cannot be established in a corpse, therefore,
it is qualified with the attribute of life. It is as if he had said, "If you give
birth to a living child, it is free." This is distinguished from divorce and
freedom of the mother as consequences, because these cannot be quali-
fied.
When he says, "The first slave I buy is free," then he buys a slave;
the slave is free, because the word "first" is a term for the individual who
185

--- Page 902 ---

186 (cid:9) Al-Hidayah(cid:9) BOOK X: Vows/OATHS
comes first. If he buys two slaves together, and thereafter another, none
of them is emancipated, due to the absence of individuality in the first
two and the absence of not coming first in the third, thus, the attribute of
being first is missing. If he says, "The first slave I buy separately is free,"
then the third slave is emancipated, because he intended individuality in
the state of purchase by his statement. The reason is that being separate
is an attribute of a certain state, and the third slave is the first with this
attribute.
If he says, "The last (next) slave I buy is free," but he buys a slave
and dies thereafter, the slave is not emancipated. The reason is that the
term "last" is a term for an individual who had to come next and there
is none before him, therefore, he is not the next. If he buys a slave and
then another and dies thereafter, the next (last) slave is free, because he is
the next individual, therefore, the attribute of being next is affirmed. He
stands emancipated the day he bought him, according to AbU Ilanifah
(God bless him), so that his freedom is worked out from the entire estate.
The two jurists say that he is emancipated the day the master dies, so
that his freedom is worked out from a third of the estate, because being
last is not established without the absence of purchase of another slave
after him, and this is realised after death. Thus, the condition is found
upon death and is restricted to death. According to Abü Ilanifah (God
bless him), death is merely an identifier (and not a condition), and as
for the attribute of being last it is established from the time of purchase,
therefore, it is established by reliance on the moment following it. The
same disagreement governs the making of three repudiations contingent
upon it. The effect is seen in the operation of prohibition of inheritance
and its absence.
If a person says, "Each slave who gives me the good news about a
child born to such and such woman, is free' then three slaves separately
give him such news, the first one bearing the news is emancipated. The
reason is that bashãrah is that news about another which reflects hap-
piness on the face, and it is stipulated that it be a news of happiness
according to common usage. This is realised in the news given by the first.
If they all give him the news at the same time, they stand emancipated,
because it is realised due to all.
If a person says, "If I buy so and so, he is free," then he buys him with
the intention of the emancipation being expiation for his vow, he is not
rewarded, because the condition is that intention coincide with the cause

--- Page 903 ---

BOOK X: Vows/OATHS(cid:9) A1-Hidiiyah(cid:9) 187
of emancipation, which is the oath. As for purchase, it is the condition
for emancipation. If he buys his father with the intention of the emanci-
pation being expiation for his oath, he is deemed rewarded in our view.
Zufar and al-Shäfi'i (God bless them) disagree. They argue that the pur-
chase is the condition for emancipation, while the 'illah is kinship. The
reason is that purchase is establishing of ownership, while emancipation
is its extinction and between them there is contradiction (purchase is not
emancipation). We argue that the purchase of a close relative amounts to
emancipation, due to the words of the Prophet (God bless him and grant
him peace), "A child can never be rewarded through his father, unless he
finds him in bondage and buys him, thus, emancipating him." Here he
deemed the purchase itself as emancipation, and did not stipulate any-
thing else besides it, and it is a parallel for the saying, "He watered it and
irrigated it."
If he buys his umm walad, he is not rewarded. The explanation of
this issue is that he says to his umm walad through marriage, "If I buy
you, you are free as expiation for my oath' and thereafter he buys her.
She stands emancipated due to the fulfilment of the condition, but he
is not rewarded on account of his expiation, because she is entitled to
freedom on account of bearing his child, therefore, such freedom can-
not be associated with the oath in all respects. This is distinguished from
the case where he says to another slave woman, "If I buy you, you are
free on account of the expiation of my oath." Here, if he buys her, he
is rewarded, because her freedom is not a matter of entitlement from
another perspective. Accordingly, associating it with the oath does not
cause any disturbance (of the rules) when intention accompanies it.
If a person says, "If! take a slave woman as my mistress, she is free'
then when he does take one whom he owns as a mistress, she is free.
The reason is that the vow has been concluded for her benefit due to the
existence of ownership. Further, the word jãriyah is indefinite, therefore,
it includes each slave woman individually. If he buys a slave woman and
turns her into his mistress, she is not emancipated through this vow.
Zufar (God bless him) disagrees. He says that making a slave woman a
mistress is not valid unless there is ownership, and mentioning it means
mentioning ownership. It is as if he said to a strange woman, "If I divorce
'It is recorded by all the sound compilations, except al-Bukhari. Al-Zaylal, vol. 3,
304.

--- Page 904 ---

188(cid:9) Al-Hidäyah(cid:9) BOOK X: Vows/OATHS
you, my slave is free' then marriage here is implied. We argue that own-
ership is mentioned by necessity for the validity of making her a mistress,
and it is a condition, therefore, it is limited to the extent of need. It is not
effective for the validity of the consequence, which is freedom. In the case
of divorce, it is effective with respect to the condition and not the conse-
quence. Thus, if he says to her, "If I divorce you, then you stand divorced
thrice," then he marries her and divorces her with a single repudiation,
she is divorced thrice. This acts as the standard for our issue here.
If a person says, "Each slave that I own is free' then his ummahãt
al-awläd, mudabbars, and slaves are all free, due to the unqualified asso-
ciation with all of them, because ownership is established in them both
as ownership of the corpus and possession. His mukãtab slaves are not
free unless he includes them in his intention, because he does not have
possession over them, therefore, he does not own their incomes nor does
he have a right to have intercourse with his mukatabah. This is distin-
guished from the umm al-walad and mudabbarah. Thus, the association
is improper and niyyah is necessary.
If a person says to his wives, "This one is divorced or this one and this
one' then the last one is divorced, while he has an option with respect to
the first two. The reason is that the word "aw" is for establishing of one
the of two things mentioned. He included her in the first two and then
added a third to the divorced woman. The reason is that the conjunction
is for participation in the rule, therefore, it is confined to the subject-
matter. It is as if he said, "One out of you two is divorced and this one."
Likewise if he says to his slaves, "This one is free or this one and this
one' then the last one is emancipated. He has an option with respect to
the first two, as we explained. Allah knows what is correct.

--- Page 905 ---

Chapter
91
Vows About Sale, Purchase and Marriage
If a person makes a vow that he will not buy or sell or take on hire, then
appoints an agent who undertakes all this, he has not violated his vow.
The reason is that the contract is concluded by the contracting party and
he owns the rights of performance (huquq).' Accordingly, if the contract-
ing party had made the vow, he would have violated his oath. The act
that is a condition is, therefore, not found, and that is the contract on
the part of the one giving the order(principal), for what is established for
him is the hukm of the contract. Unless, he includes this in his intention,
for this appears extreme or the person making a vow is one in author-
ity, who does not undertake contracts on his own, because he prevented
himself from undertaking something that is normally done.
If a person makes a vow that he will not marry, or divorce, or eman-
cipate, but then appoints an agent to do so, he has broken his vow. The
reason is that an agent in all this is like an emissary and a messenger.
He does not attribute these acts to himself, but to the person giving the
order, and the rights of performance revert to the one giving the order
and not to him. If he says that he formed the intention of not speak-
ing about these things, he is not to be deemed truthful for adjudication
alone. We shall be pointing out the meaning of this in the explanation of
the difference, God, the Exalted, willing.
If he makes a vow that he will not beat his slave and will not slaugh-
ter his goat, but he orders another who does it, then he has violated his
vow. The reason is that the owner has the authority of beating his slave
and of slaughtering his goat, therefore, he possesses the right to delegate
'The Hanafis make a distinction between the /zukm and huquq in the contract of
agency.
189

--- Page 906 ---

Igo(cid:9) Al-Hidyah(cid:9) BOOK X: Vows/OATHS
the authority to another. Further, the benefit of doing so reverts to the
owner, therefore, he is deemed the direct actor as there are no rights that
go to the person ordered. If he says, "I intended not to undertake these
acts myself' he is to be deemed truthful for purposes of adjudication,
as distinguished from what has preceded about divorce. The underlying
reasoning for the distinction is that divorce is nothing but the expression
of words that lead to the occurrence of divorce for her. Ordering such an
act is like expressing those words, and the word "divorce" includes both,
therefore, if he intended their expression then he intended one particu-
lar meaning out of a general meaning. Accordingly, he is to be deemed
truthful morally not legally. As for beating and slaughter, they are phys-
ical acts that are recognised by their effects, and attributing them to the
person ordering are by way of causation in the figurative sense. Thus, if
he intended to undertake the act himself, then he intended what is true
in fact, therefore, he is to be deemed truthful morally and legally.
If a person makes a vow that he will not beat his child, but orders
another person to do so and he does beat him, he has not violated his
vow. The reason is that the benefit of beating the child will revert to the
child, which is disciplining and refinement, therefore, his act will not be
attributed to the person ordering. This is distinguished from the order to
beat the slave, because the benefit of obedience through his order will go
to the person ordering. Consequently, the act is attributed to him.
If a person says to another, "If I sell this dress for you, then my wife
is divorced' after which the person who is the object of the vow conceals
this dress within the dresses of the person making the vow, who sells
them without knowing of such concealment, then he has not broken his
vow. The reason is that the character lam precedes the word sale and this
requires that it be specific to him, and this means that he sell under his
orders, because sale accepts delegation, but this is not found here. This is
different from the case where he says, "If I sell a dress that you own...
for here he will violate his vow as he will be selling a dress owned by
him, whether or not it is under his order, and whether or not he is aware
of it. The reason is that the character lam precedes the subject-matter
as it is proximate to it, therefore, it requires that it be specific to him.
This is true if the dress is owned by him. Cases parallel to this are of
dyeing and stitching and each act that accepts delegation of authority, as
distinguished from eating, drinking and beating the slave, as these acts

--- Page 907 ---

BOOK X: VOWS/OATHS(cid:9) Al-Hidayah(cid:9) 191
do not accept delegation, therefore, the rule will not be separate in both
cases.
If a person says, "This slave is free if I sell him," and he sells him
on the condition that he has an option, the slave is emancipated, due to
the existence of the condition, which is sale, and ownership in the slave
continues, therefore, it is converted to its consequence, which is freedom.
Likewise if the buyer says, "If I buy him he is free," and he buys him on
the condition that he has an option, the slave is emancipated, as well. The
reason is that the condition is fulfilled, and that is purchase, and owner-
ship is established in him. This is obvious on the basis of the rule upheld
by the two jurists' as well as on the rule upheld by the Imãm, because this
emancipation depends on its condition, and what is contingent is like the
immediate. If emancipation is given effect immediately, prior ownership
is established for him, likewise in this case.
If a person says, "If I do not sell this male slave or this female slave,
then my wife is divorced' following which he emancipates them or gives
them the status of mudabbar, his wife is divorced. The reason is that the
condition stands fulfilled, which is the absence of sale due to the loss of
the subject-matter of sale.
If a woman says to her husband, "What if you bring another wife?"
and he replies, "Each wife that I have will stand divorced thrice' then
this wife who took the vow from him stands divorced (too) for pur-
poses of adjudication. According to Abü YUsuf (God bless him), "This
wife is not divorced for he excluded her through his response' there-
fore, the decision will be accordingly. Further, his intention is to please
her and that is by divorcing others besides her, thus, it will be qualified
accordingly. The reasoning underlying the authentic narration is based
on the generality of the statement, and he went beyond the context of
the response, therefore, the statement will be treated as an independent
statement. Further, his purpose could have been to point to a grave action
when she raised an objection about what the shar' (law) has deemed law-
ful for him, and with such vacillation of the issue it is not suitable for
restriction. If he intended wives other than her, then he is to be deemed
truthful morally, but not legally, as it amounts to the restriction of the
general meaning. Allah knows what is correct.
Khiyar of the buyer does not prevent the passing of title to him.
2

--- Page 908 ---

192(cid:9) Al-Hidayah(cid:9) BOOK X: VOWS/OATHS

--- Page 909 ---

Chapter
92
Vows About Hajj, Prayer and Fasting
He said: If a person, while in the Ka'bah or in another place says, "I am
under an obligation to walk to the House of Allah, the Exalted or to the
Ka'bah' then he is under an obligation to perform hajj or 'umrah on
foot. If he likes he may ride, but then he has to offer a sacrifice (dam).
Analogy dictates that he is not obliged to do anything, because he made
obligatory upon himself what is not an obligatory means of seeking near-
ness to Allah or is intended essentially. Our opinion has been transmitted
down to us from 'All (God be pleased with him). Further, the people
were accustomed to make hajj and 'umrah obligatory through such vows.
Thus, it is as if he had said, "It is obligatory upon me to visit the House
on foot." This makes it obligatory for him to go on foot, but if he likes he
can take a ride and make an offering. We have already mentioned this in
the topic on religious rites.
If he says, "It is obligatory upon me to go out or to move towards
the House of Allah, the Exalted," then there is no such obligation upon
him. The reason is that acquiring the obligation to perform hajj or 'umrah
through such expression is not part of the common usage.
If he says, "I am under an obligation to walk to the klaram or to
al-Safã wa-al-Marwah," then there is no such obligation for him. This
is the view according to Abü Hanifah (God bless him). AbU YUsuf and
Muhammad (God bless them) said that because of his statement, "I am
under an obligation to walk' he is obliged to perform hajj or 'umrah. If
he had said, "Up to al-Masjid al-Haräm' then the same disagreement of
views applies. The two jurists are of the view that the Haram is included in
the House being adjacent to it. Likewise, al-Masjid al-Harãm is included
in the House, therefore, mentioning one amounts to mentioning the
193

--- Page 910 ---

194(cid:9) Al-Hidãyah(cid:9) BOOK X: VOWS/OATHS
other. This is distinguished from the case where he mentions al-Safã and
al-Marwah, because they are separated from the House. According to
the Imãm, the creation of the obligation of ihrãm through such expres-
sions is not part of the common usage, and it is not possible to create an
obligation through the use of the word "walking" in its actual meaning,
therefore, the obligation is prevented.
If a person says, "My slave is free if I do not perform this year:' and
thereafter he says that he has performed the hajj with two witnesses tes-
tifying that he offered a sacrifice this year at Kufah, then his slave will
not be emancipated. This is the view according to Abu Hanifah and AbU
YUsuf (God bless them). Muhammad (God bless him) said that he is
emancipated, because this testimony is about an act that is known, which
is sacrifice. This act necessarily indicates the negation of the performance
of hajj, therefore, the condition (of the vow) stands fulfilled. The two
jurists maintain that it is the negation of hajj, because the purpose is to
establish the negation of ha)) and not the offering of the sacrifice (there-
fore it is not admissible as testimony), because there is no demand for
such negation (on the part of the public). It is as if they rendered testi-
mony that he did not perform ha)] this year. The utmost that can be said
is that this negation is within the knowledge of the witnesses, but we can-
not distinguish one form of adjudication from the other (for purposes of
adjudication).
If a person makes a vow that he will not fast, but he forms the inten-
tion of a fast and fasts for a moment then breaks it, he has violated his
vow, because fasting is abstaining from acts leading to the breaking of the
fast with the intention of seeking nearness to Allah.
If he makes a vow that he will not fast for one day or keep one fast,
but fasts for a moment and then breaks it, he has not broken his vow.
The reason is that by this is meant a complete fast that is considered so
by the law (shar'), and this occurs by terminating it at the end of the day,
and the day is explicitly mentioned in determining its duration.
If he makes a vow that he will not pray, but he performs the qiyam,
rukü', then he does not break his vow. If, however, he also performs the
prostration and then terminates it, he breaks his vow. Analogy dictates
that he has violated his oath by commencement taking into account the
ruling for the commencement of fasting. The basis for istihsãn is that
prayer is an expression for various elements (arkãn). Thus, as long as he

--- Page 911 ---

BOOK X Vows/OATHS(cid:9) A1-Hidayah(cid:9) 195
does not perform all of them it cannot be called prayer. This is distin-
guished from fasting as that consists of a single rukn, which is abstaining
and is repeated in the next moment.
If he makes a vow that he will not offer salät, he does not break his
vow until he completes two rak'ahs. The reason is that he meant by it the
legally acknowledged salãt, and the minimum is two rak'ahs due to the
prohibition of offering a single (odd) rak'ah (butayrã'). Allah knows best.

--- Page 912 ---

196 (cid:9) Al-Hidãyah(cid:9)
BOOK X: VOWS/OATHS

--- Page 913 ---

Chapter 93
Vows About Dresses and Jewellery
If a person says to his wife, "If I wear cloth made of the yarn you spin,
then it is hady," and he then buys cotton that she spins and weaves after
which he wears it, it is a hady according to AbU Hanifah (God bless him).
The two jurists say that he is not obliged to treat it as hady, unless she
spins yarn from the cotton owned by him on the day of the vow. The
meaning of hady is charity that is to be given at Makkah, because it is the
name of the charity made for it. The two jurists argue that a nadhr (vow)
is valid in the case of a thing owned or when it is associated with the
cause of ownership, which is not found here. The reason is that clothing
and spinning by a woman are not causes of ownership. The imãm argues
that spinning by a woman is usually from the yarn owned by the husband,
and it is the usual that is intended, and this is the cause of ownership. It
is for this reason that he will break his vow if she spins from the cotton
owned by him at the time of the vow, because cotton is not mentioned in
the statement of the vow.
If a person vows that he will not wear jewellery, but he wears a silver
ring, he has not broken his vow, because it is not considered jewellery
according to custom or law, therefore, its use is allowed for men and as
a seal for sealing things. If it is made of gold, he has broken his vow,
because it is jewellery, therefore, its use is not allowed for men.
If he wears a string of pearls that are not inlaid, he does not break
his vow according to AbU klanifah (God be pleased with him). The two
jurists said that he has broken his vow, because it is jewellery in reality
insofar as even the Qur'an has called it as such. The Imãm argues that it
is deemed jewellery according to custom, unless it is not inlaid, and the
basis of vows is custom. It is said that this a disagreement arising from
197

--- Page 914 ---

198(cid:9) Al-Hidayah(cid:9) BOOK X: Vows/OATHS
differences of time and age. The fatwa is issued according to the view
of the two jurists, because wearing pearls as jewellery by themselves is
customary.
If a person vows that that he will not sleep on a bed, but he sleeps
on it when on top of it is a blanket (qiram), then he has broken his vow,
because it is a constituent part of the bed, therefore, he will be considered
to have slept on it. If he places another bed on it and sleeps on it, he does
not break his vow. The reason is that something similar to it is not part
of it and the reference to the first stands terminated.
If he makes a vow that he will not sit on the ground, but then he
sits on a rug or mat, he has not broken his vow, because this cannot be
termed as sitting on the ground. This is distinguished from the case where
between the ground and his body is his dress, because that is deemed a
subsidiary part of him and cannot be considered a barrier.
If he makes a vow that he will not sit on a cot, but then he sits on a
cot upon which is a rug or a mat, he has broken his vow, because he is
considered to be sitting on the cot. Sitting on a cot in practice is usually in
this way. This is different from the situation where he places another cot
on top of it, because it is similar, and reference to the first is terminated.
Allah knows what is correct.

--- Page 915 ---

Chapter 94
Vows About Homicide and Causing Injury
If a person says to another, "If I strike you then my slave is free:' and he
strikes him after he is dead, then this statement will be construed "while
he is alive?' The reason is that striking (hitting) is a term for an act that
is painful and establishes contact with the body. Pain is not realised in
the case of a corpse. A person who will be tormented in the grave will be
brought to life, according to the view of most scholars. The same is the
case with the giving of clothing, because the meaning is the passing of
ownership when used in an unqualified sense. Clothing by way of expia-
tion belongs to this category, and it is not realised in the case of a corpse,
unless he intends thereby a covering. It is said that in Farsi it is construed
to mean clothing. Likewise speech and entering upon someone. The rea-
son is that the purpose of speech is to make the other person understand
and death negates this. The meaning of entering upon is visiting a person
and after death it is his grave that is visited, not the person.
If he says, "If I give you a bath, my slave is free:' and he gives him a
bath after his death, he has broken his vow (for by not emancipating the
slave). The reason is that bathing means causing the water to flow and its
purpose is purification. This stands realised in the case of a corpse.
If a man says that he will not beat his wife, but then pulls her hair,
tries to strangle her, or bites her, then he has broken his vow, because
beating is a term for a painful act, and pain stands realised. It is said that
he will not break his vow in case of play for it amounts to enjoyment and
not beating.'
If a man says, "If I do not kill so and so then my wife is divorced:'
when this so and so is dead and he is aware of it, he breaks his vow. The
'That would mean that if he beats her during play he does not break his vow.
199

--- Page 916 ---

200(cid:9) Al-Hidayah(cid:9) BOOK X: Vows/OATI-Js
reason is that he formed his vow on the basis of life that Allah renews for
him, and that is conceivable, therefore, the vow takes effect and he breaks
it due to normal inability. If he is not aware of his death, he does not
break his vow. The reason is that he based his vow on life that was run-
ning through him, in which case completion is not conceivable. The issue
becomes analogous to the issue of the jar' along with the disagreement
over it. In that issue there is no detail about having knowledge, which is
correct.
21f I do not drink from this jar, .... As discussed earlier.

--- Page 917 ---

Chapter 95
Vows About the Demand of Dirhams
If a person says that he will definitely repay his debt soon, then it means
a period that is less than a month. If he says after an extended period
then it extends beyond a month. The reason is that what is less than it
is considered a short period and what is more than that is an extended
period. It is for this reason that it is said after a long period, "I have not
seen for more than a month."
If a person says, "I will pay the debt of so and so today:' then he pays
him, but that person finds that the coins are demonetised, or counterfeit,
or they belong to a third party, then the person making the vow has not
broken his vow. The reason is that demonetisation is a defect, but a defect
does not eliminate the species, therefore, if he permits repayment in such
coins the debt will be satisfied and the condition of fulfilment of the vow
will be found. Taking possession of coins claimed by a third party is valid,
and returning these does not eliminate the fulfilment that is realised.
If he finds them alloyed with copper or bronze, he breaks his vow,
because these are not from the species of dirhams so it is not permitted
to use them in transactions of sarf (currency transactions) and salam
(advance payment). If he sells him a slave in lieu of the claim and the
creditor takes possession, he has fulfilled his vow. The reason is that the
satisfaction of the debt claim is by way of swapping. The condition was
realised by the mere sale of the slave, but possession has been stipulated
to affirm it. If he makes a gift of it to him, that is, of the debt claim the
vow is not fulfilled, due to the lack of swapping, because satisfaction is
his act, while gift is the extinction of the debt on the part of the creditor.
If a person vows that he will not take possession of his debt claim in
parts (some dirhams and not others), and he takes possession of part of
201

--- Page 918 ---

202(cid:9) A1-Hidãyah(cid:9) BOOK X: VOWS/OATHS
it, he has not broken his vow until he takes possession of the entire debt
in parts. The reason is that the condition is possession of the entire debt,
but has been qualified by instalments. Note that he spelled out possession
with respect to the debt that was identified, therefore, it applies to the
entire debt, and he does not break his vow before it. If he takes possession
of his debt in two types of measures of weight, and is not occupied with
anything but the process of weighing in between the two processes, he
does not break his vow and it is not separate possession. The reason is
that sometimes it is usually not possible to take possession all at once in
a single act, therefore, this discrepancy is exempted.
If a person says, "If! have any amount except one hundred dirhams,
my wife is divorced' but he has only fifty dirhams, he does not break his
vow. The reason is that the purpose of such statement in common usage
is to deny any amount in excess of one hundred. Further, the exemption
of one hundred is the exemption of its constituent parts. Likewise if he
says other than one hundred or besides one hundred, because all these
are instruments of exemption. Allah knows what is correct.

--- Page 919 ---

Chapter 96
Scattered Issues
If he makes a vow that he will not do such and such act, he has to give
it up forever, because he negated the act in absolute terms, therefore, the
prevention became general and acted as a general negation. If he makes
a vow that he will definitely do such and such act, then if he does it once
he has fulfilled his vow, because what is binding is the commission of the
act once without being specified. This is the situation of positive action,
therefore, he fulfils it by commission of the act once. He will break his vow
when he gives up hope of committing the act, and this will take place due
to his death or by the destruction of the object of the act.
If a ruler takes a vow from a person that he will definitely inform
him about the entry of each mischiefmonger into the land, then this vow
continues till the authority of such ruler exclusively. The reason is that
the purpose is to repel his mischief or the mischief of another through
deterrence. Consequently, there is no benefit of this after the termination
of his authority, and such termination is through death or by his removal
according to the authentic narration (zãhir al-riwãyah).
If a person makes a vow that he will gift his slave to so and so, but
that person does not accept the gift, then he has fulfilled his oath, with
Zufar (God bless him) disagreeing. He compares it to sale, because it is
the passing of ownership for something similar. We maintain that it is
a contract of donation, and is completed by action on the part of the
donor. It is for this reason that he said in the statement that he made a
gift, but the donee did not accept. Further, the purpose is the expression
of donation and is completed through it. As for sale it is an exchange of
counter-values, which requires action from both sides.
203

--- Page 920 ---

204(cid:9) Al-Hidãyah(cid:9) BOOK X: VOWS/OATHS
If a person makes a vow that he will not smell aromatic plants, but
he smells rose or jasmine, he does not break his vow, because it is a name
for a thing that does not have a stem, while these two have a stem.
If he makes a vow that he will not buy violets, and he has no partic-
ular intention, then it will be construed to mean its oil, on the basis of
customary usage. It is for this reason that one who sells such oil is said
to be a seller of violets, and purchase is based upon this as well. It is said
that in our usage the term is applied to its petals. If he makes this vow
with respect to a rose, then it will apply to its petals, because the actual
application (not figurative) is this, and usage affirms this. In the case of
violets usage is predominant. Allah knows what is correct.

--- Page 921 ---

Al- Hidãyah
BOOK ELEVEN
Hudüd
(Fixea Penalties)
Ch. 97: The Meaning and Proof of Hadd (cid:9) 207
Ch. 98: The Nature of Intercourse That Gives Rise to Hadd (cid:9) 211
Ch. 99: Testimony of Hadd and its Retraction(cid:9) 219
Ch. 100: The Hadd for Drinking Khamr (cid:9) 229
(cid:9)
Ch. 101: The Hadd of Qadhf 223
(cid:9)
Sec. 1: Ta'zir 242

--- Page 922 ---

206(cid:9) Al-Hidäyah(cid:9) BOOK XI: FIXED PENALTIES

--- Page 923 ---

Chapter 97
The Meaning and Proof of Hadd
He said: Hadd literally means prevention. In this sense, the word haddãd
is applied to mean a guard. In the shari'ah (technical sense), it is a penalty
that is predetermined (fixed) as a right of Allah. Consequently, qisãs
(retaliation) is not called hadd as it is a right of the individual, nor is
ta'zir called hadd as it is not predetermined. The primary purpose in pro-
mulgating it as law is deterrence from acts that are harmful for subjects.
Purification (from sin) is not the primary purpose in hadd, on the evi-
dence that it is ordained for the unbeliever as well.
He said: Zin (unlawful sexual intercourse) is proved through tes-
timony and confession. The meaning here is proof presented before the
imam (qadi). The reason is that testimony is a manifest evidence and like-
wise confession, because the truth in it is predominant, especially when
it concerns the proof of injury and incrimination. As arriving at certain
knowledge is difficult, manifest evidence is deemed sufficient.
He said: Testimony is found where four witnesses testify against a
man or a woman that they have committed zinã. This is based on the
words of the Exalted, "If any of your women are guilty of lewdness, take
the evidence of four (reliable) witnesses from amongst you against them;
and if they testify, confine them to houses until death do claim them,
or Allah ordain for them some (other) way." Allah, the Exalted, has also
said: 'And those who launch a charge against chaste women, and produce
not four witnesses (to support their allegations), flog them with eighty
stripes; and reject their evidence ever after: for such men are wicked
transgressors."2 The Prophet (God bless him and grant him peace) said to
'Qur'än 4:15
Qur'an 24: 4
2
207

--- Page 924 ---

208(cid:9) Al-Hidayah(cid:9) BOOK XI: FIXED PENALTIES
a man who had accused his wife, "Bring four (witnesses) who will testify
to the truth of your allegation."' The reason is that in the stipulation of
four witnesses the meaning of concealment is realised, and that is recom-
mended, while publication is opposed to this purpose.4
When they (the witnesses) testify, the imam asks them about zinà
as to what it is and how it is committed, where did the person commit
zinã, when did he commit zinã, and with whom did he commit zinã? The
reason is that the Prophet (God bless him and grant him peace) sought
an elaboration from Mã'iz5 about the mode of commission and about
the woman with whom it was committed. The reason is that precaution
in such a case is obligatory, because it is possible that he committed the
act, but not through the vagina even if intended, or that he committed
the act in the dãr al-harb, or he committed an act that is barred by time,
or there is a shubhah or doubt in it that is not known to him or to the
witnesses. Accordingly, an exhaustive investigation is to be made to find
a way for waiving the hadd.
Thus, when they have testified to this effect, and said, "We saw him
having intercourse with her through her vagina, like the kohl stick inside
the container,' the qali has enquired about them and they are found to
be 'ad!, both through secret and public inquiry, he is to give a ruling on
the basis of their testimony. He is not to deem sufficient a public enquiry
about their adãlah, and this to find a way out for waiving the penalty. The
Prophet (God bless him and grant him peace) has said, "Waive the hudüd
6
penalties as far as you can." This is different from all other rights accord-
ing to AbU Hanifah (God bless him). We will elaborate the meaning of
3A1-Zayla'i says that the tradition is gharib with these words, however, AbU Ya'lã al-
Mawsii has recorded a tradition in the same meaning in his Musnad, "Four witness else
the hadd on your back." Al-Zayla'i then records a large number of traditions that convey
similar meanings. Al-Zayla'i, vol. 3,3o6.
4The underlying hikmah mentioned by the Author is extremely important for under-
standing the nature of the offence of zina and how it is treated in Islamic law. In our view,
unless the factor of concealment is appreciated, the nature of the offences of zinã and
qadhf cannot be understood.
51t is recorded by Abü Dawüd. Another tradition conveying a similar meaning is also
recorded by Abü Dawud as well as al-Nasã'i. Al-Zayla'i, vol. 3, 308.
61t is recorded in different versions from 'A'ishah, 'All and Abü Hurayrah, God be
pleased with them all. The versions are recorded by al-Tirmidhi, al-Hkam, al-Dar'qutni
and Abü Ya'la al-Mawsili. A1-Zayla'i, vol. 3, 309.

--- Page 925 ---

BOOK XI: FIXED PENALTIES(cid:9) Al-Hidyah(cid:9) 209
establishing 'adãlah, both public and secret, in the Book of Testimony,
Allah, the Exalted willing.
He (Muhammad al-Shaybani) said in al-Asl that he is to restrain him
till he has asked about the (moral probity of) witnesses who are making
the allegation of the offence. The Messenger of Allah (God bless him and
grant him peace) restrained a man on the basis of an accusation. This is
different from debts where there is no imprisonment prior to the mani-
festation of 'adãlah. The distinction will be made evident for you, Allah,
the Exalted, willing.
He (al-QudUri) said: Confession is where a major and sane person
confesses to the commission of zinã. He does this four times in four
(different) sessions, with the qadi rejecting his confession each time he
makes it. Majority and sanity have been stipulated, because the state-
ments of the minor and insane are not considered (are inadmissible),
or because they are not liable for hadd. The stipulation of four (confes-
sions) is our view. According to al-Shãfi'i a single confession is sufficient,
on the analogy of the remaining rights. The reason is that it (a single con-
fession) manifests the truth, and the repetition of the confession does not
enhance the manifestation of the truth, as distinguished from increase in
the number of witnesses (to four).
We rely on the tradition of Mã'iz (God be pleased with him). The
Prophet (God bless him and grant him peace) delayed the implementa-
tion of the hadd till the confession was completed by him four times in
four sessions. If what is less than this was sufficient to bring out the truth,
he would not have delayed the matter for the proof of the obligation (of
implementation). Further, the testimony was made exclusive by increas-
ing the number of witnesses, likewise the confession. This was done due
to the gravity of the offence of zinã and to realise the meaning of conceal-
ment. It is necessary to have different sessions, on the basis of what we
have related, because the unity of session affects the establishing of the
different elements that need to be proved, and in case of a single session
it gives rise to the possibility of focusing on a single element. Confession
depends upon the person confessing, therefore, it is his sessions that are
taken into account and not those of the qãdi. Separate sessions means
that the qãdi sends him out each time he confesses so that when he goes
out the qadi can no longer see him and he then returns and confesses
again. This is reported as an opinion of AbU Hanifah (God bless him),

--- Page 926 ---

210(cid:9) Al-Hidayah(cid:9) BOOK XI: FIXED PENALTIES
because the Prophet (God bless him and grant him peace) rejected Mã'iz
each time and he went out disappearing behind the walls of Madinah.
He said: When his confession four times is complete, he is to ask him
about zinã, as to what it is, how it is committed, where he committed it
and with whom? If he elaborates all this, imposition of hadd becomes
binding, due to the completion of proof. The rationale underlying these
questions we have elaborated in the topic of shahãdah (testimony). He
did not mention here the question about time, but he did mention it in
the topic of shahãdah, because limitation of time prevents the rendering
of testimony though not a confession. It is said that if he did question him
about it, it would be valid due to the possibility of his having committed
it during his minority.
If the person confessing retracts his confession prior to the execu-
tion of the hadd or during it, his retraction is to be accepted and he
is released. Al-Shãfi'i (God bless him), and this is also the view of Ibn
AbI Layla (God bless him), the hadd is to be implemented for it became
obligatory through his confession, therefore, it is not annulled due to his
retraction or his denial, just as if it had become obligatory through tes-
timony and stood proved like qisãs (retaliation) and the hadd of qadhf
(false accusation of unlawful sexual intercourse). We argue that retrac-
tion is a report that is probably true and is just like confession, and there
is no one who holds him to be lying, therefore, a shubhah is established
in his confession. This is distinguished from the cases where the rights of
the individual are involved, which are qisãs and the hadd of qadhf, due to
the existence of those who hold him to be lying. This is not the case with
what is purely the right of Allah.

--- Page 927 ---

Chapter 98
The Nature of Intercourse That Gives Rise to
Hadd
He said: Intercourse that gives rise to hadd is zinã. In technical legal
language and in usage it is sexual intercourse of a man with a woman
through the vagina without lawful ownership (of such access) and with-
out the shubhah (justifed yet erroneous belief) of ownership (of such
access). The reason is that it is an act that is prohibited and the pro-
hibition is absolute when it is devoid of ownership or its justified but
erroneous belief. This is supported by the words of the Prophet (God
bless him and grant him peace), "Waive the hudüd in case of justified yet
erroneous belief (shubhah)."1
Thereafter, shubhah is of two types. The first is called shubhah ft a!-
fi'l
(doubt in the act) also called the doubt of ambiguity (ishtibãh). The
second is called shubhah ft al-mahall (doubt in the subject-matter) also
called legal doubt (hukmiyyah). The first is realised in the case of a per-
son for whom it has become ambiguous, because the meaning is that
he considers an evidence that is not really the proper evidence. In this
probability is essential for the realisation of ambiguity. The second arises
by adducing evidence that negates the prohibition itself, but it does not
depend upon the conjecture of the offender or his belief.
Hadd is not enforced in both cases, due to the absolute meaning of
the tradition. Paternity is established in the second type of shubhah if he
claims it, but it is not established in the first type even if he claims it.
The reason is that in the first type the act is purely zind, but the hadd is
'It is gharib in this version. It is recorded by Ibn Abi Shaybah and is found in the
Musnad of AbU Ilanifah (God bless him). Al-Zayla'i, vol. 3, 333.
211

--- Page 928 ---

212(cid:9) Al-Hidyah(cid:9) BOOK XI: FIXED PENALTIES
not enforced due to a factor that is referred back to the actor, and this is
the ambiguity created in his mind. In the second it is not treated purely
as zinã. Shubhah ft al-fl'l is committed with eight types of persons: the
slave girl of the offender's father, of his mother, and of his wife; the wife
divorced thrice while she is in her waiting period; the woman divorced
irrevocably in lieu of wealth while she is in her 'iddah; the umm al-walad
whom the master has emancipated and she is in her waiting period; the
slave girl of the master with respect to the slave; and the pledged slave girl
with respect to the mortgagee, according to the narration in the Book of
Hudüd. In all these cases there is no hadd for the offender if he claims
that he thought she was permissible for him. If, however, he says that he
knew that she was prohibited for him, he is to be awarded hadd.
Shubhah ft al-mahall occurs in six cases: the slave girl of his son;
the woman divorced irrevocably through figurative expressions; the slave
woman sold to buyer prior to delivery with respect to the buyer; the
woman entitled to dower prior to its possession by her with respect to
the husband; a slave girl owned jointly with respect to one co-owner;
the pledged slave girl with respect to the mortgagee, according the nar-
ration from the Book of Rahn. In these six cases hadd is not enforced,
even if he says I knew that she was prohibited for me. Thereafter, doubt
is established, according to Abü Hanifah (God bless him) on the basis of
'aqd (contract), even if it is agreed upon for its prohibition and he knows
about it. According to the rest, shubhah is not established if he had knowl-
edge of the prohibition. This will be obvious in the case of the marriage
within the prohibited degrees, as will be coming up, God, the Exalted,
willing.
Now that we have understood this (we say:)
If a person divorces his wife thrice and then has intercourse with her
during her 'iddah following which he says that he knew that she was
prohibited for him, he is to be subjected to hadd, due to the extinction,
from all aspects, of ownership that legalises access. In this case shubhah is
negated. The Qur'an stated the negation of permissibility here and on this
there is ijma' as well. The opinion of one who opposes this is not taken
into account for it is opposition not disagreement. If he were to say, "I
thought she was permitted for me' he is not to be subjected to hadd,
because the ambiguity of the subject-matter persists. The reason is that
the effect of ownership continues with respect to paternity, confinement
to the house, and maintenance, therefore, the uncertainty in his mind is

--- Page 929 ---

BOOK XI: FIXED PENALTIES(cid:9) Al-Hidãyah(cid:9) 213
taken into account for waiving the hadd. The umm al-walad emancipated
by the master, a woman who has obtained khul' and the one who has
been divorced in lieu of wealth are in the position of the woman divorced
thrice, due to the prohibition based upon consensus and the continuity
of some effects during 'iddah.
If he says to her, "You are free:' or "You are absolved," or "Your affair
is in your hands," and she chooses herself, after which he has intercourse
with her during her 'iddah and says that he knew she was prohibited for
him, he is not to be subjected to hadd, due to the disagreement about this
divorce among the Companions (God be pleased with them). It was the
opinion of 'Umar (God be pleased with him) that this amounts to a sin-
gle revocable repudiation. Likewise the response in the remaining cases of
repudiation through figurative expressions. Likewise if he intended three
repudiations (in figurative expressions) due to the existence of disagree-
ment (of the Companions) along with this.
If a woman, other than his wife, is brought to him on his wedding
night, and the women bringing her say, "She is married to you," follow-
ing which he has intercourse with her, he is not to be subjected to hadd.
He is liable for her dower. 'Umar (God be pleased with him) gave this
decision in such a case. She also has to undergo 'iddah. The reason is that
he relied upon an evidence and that was a report about the subject-matter
of ambiguity. The reason is that one does not distinguish between one's
wife and another woman on the first meeting. Consequently, he is like
one who has been deceived. The person who commits qadhf against him
(on this account) is not to be awarded the hadd, except according to one
narration from Abü Yüsuf (God bless him), because ownership (of legal
access) is absent in reality.
If a man finds a woman on his wife's bed and has intercourse with
her, he is to be subjected to hadd. The reason is that there is no ambiguity
here due to the long association (with his wife). The ambiguity is not
based upon a dali! here. The reason is that some women in the prohibited
degree, who are present in her room, may sleep on her bed. Likewise if he
is blind, because it is possible for him to distinguish through questioning
and other means, unless he calls out to the stranger and she responds
saying that she is his wife, and he has intercourse with her, because a
report is valid evidence.

--- Page 930 ---

214(cid:9) Al-Hidayah(cid:9) BOOK XI: FIXED PENALTIES
If a person marries a woman with whom his nikãh is not lawful, and
he has intercourse with her, he is not to be subjected to hadd, accord-
ing to AbU I-Ianifah (God bless him). He is, however, liable to some
penalty if he knows about such prohibition. Abü YUsuf, Muhammad and
al-Shafi'i (God bless them) said that he is to be subjected to hadd if he
was aware of the prohibition, because it is a contract that has not been
concluded for its subject-matter, therefore, it is meaningless, as if it had
been associated with males. The reason here is that the subject-matter
of the transaction should be the subject-matter for its legal effects, when
the legal effect is permissibility, while the woman here is in the prohib-
ited degree. AbU Hanifah (God bless him) relies on the argument that
the contract has been concluded in conformity with its subject-matter,
because the subject-matter of the transaction is one that suits its purpose
for females are the daughters of Adam who are meant for procreation,
which is the purpose. Thus, it is necessary that the contract be concluded
for all its legal effects, except that this contract fell short of full permis-
sibility (due to the text), therefore, it gives rise to shubhah. The reason
is that shubhah is something that resembles what is established, and is
not the exact thing that is established. He has, however, committed an
offence, and as there is not fixed penalty for it he is to be awarded ta'zir.
If a man has intercourse with a strange woman through locations
other than the vagina, he is to be awarded ta'zir, because it is an offence
for which there is no fixed penalty.
If a man has intercourse with his wife through a location that is
makrüh (rectum), or commits an act similar to the acts of the People
of Lot, there is no hadd for him according to AbU Hanifah (God bless
him), rather he is to be awarded ta'zir. The addition in al-Jami' al-Saghir
is that he is to be imprisoned. The two jurists maintain that it is like zinã,
therefore, he is to be subjected to hadd, which is also one opinion from
al-Shãfi'i (God bless him). The two jurists argue that it carries the mean-
ing of zinã, because it is the satisfaction of lust through a location that
is aroused in a manner that is completely a sexual act and invokes pure
prohibition due to the intention of unlawfully spilling sperm. The Imãm
argues that it is not zinã due to the disagreement of the Companions
(God be pleased with them) about the obligation of burning with fire,
making a wall fall on them, and dropping from a high place face down-
wards followed by the raining of stones on them. Further, it is not in the
meaning of zinã for it does not amount to the wasting of children nor

--- Page 931 ---

BOOK XI: FIXED PENALTIES(cid:9) Al-Hidãyah(cid:9) 215
confusion about parentage. Likewise it is a lesser offence as the desire is
from one side while the desire in zinã is from both sides. In addition to
this, what has been related by way of traditions is to be construed as a
penalty to be awarded by way of siyãsah or is to be awarded to one who
considers homosexuality as lawful. The act, however, is to be punished
with ta'zir in his view, as we have elaborated.
There is no hadd for a person who commits bestiality, because it does
not convey the meaning of zinã insofar as it is an offence, and also with
respect to desire as a normal person is repelled by it. The cause for it
is uncontrolled sexuality and extreme lewdness, therefore, this offence is
not to be concealed, however, the offender is to be subjected to ta'zir. The
report that the animal is "to be slaughtered and burned"' is for ending a
discussion about it, and that too is not obligatory.
If a person commits zinã in enemy territory or in an area controlled
by rebels and then moves over to us (dãr al-Islam), he is not to be sub-
jected to the hadd. Al-Shãfi'i (God bless him) said that he is to be awarded
hadd. The reason is that by professing the Islamic faith he has chosen to
be bound by its ahkãm wherever he is located. We rely on the saying of
the Prophet (God bless him and grant him peace), "The hudüd are not to
be implemented in the dãr al-harb."3 The purpose is deterrence and the
authority of the imãm is cut off in these territories, therefore, the obliga-
tion becomes devoid of any purpose. The hadd is not to be implemented
after he has moved out of these territories, because it was not obligatory
initially and cannot be converted into an obligation now. If the person
who has such authority to implement the hadd takes part in the battle
himself, like the khalifah or the governor of a city, he is to implement
the hadd in the case of a person who commits zinã in his military camp,
because he is under his authority. This is distinguished from the military
commander or the commander of a detachment, because the authority
to implement the hudüd is not delegated to them.
If an enemy male enters our territory on amän (safe-custody) and
commits zinã with a Dhimmiyyah, or a Dhimmi with an enemy woman,
2ft is gharib in these words, however, a similar tradition is recorded by the compilers
of the four Sunan. A1-Zayla'i, vol. 3, 342.
31t is gharib in these words, but it is recorded by al-Bayhaqi from al-Shafi'i from
Abu Yüsuf (God bless him). A1-Zayla'i, vol. 3, 343. There are athãr conveying the same
meaning. Ibid.

--- Page 932 ---

216(cid:9) Al-Hidãyah(cid:9) BOOK XI: FIXED PENALTIES
the Dhimmi and the Dhimmiyyah are to be awarded the hadd accord-
ing to AbU klanifah (God bless him), while the enemy, male or female,
are not to be subjected to hadd. This is also the opinion of Muhammad
(God bless him) in the case of a Dhimmi, that is, when he has intercourse
with an enemy woman. If, however, an enemy male has intercourse
with a Dhimmiyyah, they are not to be subjected to hadd according to
Muhammad (God bless him), which is the earlier opinion of AbU Yüsuf
(God bless him). AbU YUsuf (God bless him) said that they are all to
be subjected to the hadd, which is his second opinion. AbU Yüsuf (God
bless him) argues that the person entering our territory on safe-conduct
(musta'min) has agreed to make our ahkãm pertaining to the mu'ãmalãt
binding on himself during the period of his stay, just as the Dhimmi
has agreed to abide by them for his entire life. Consequently, he is to be
awarded the hadd of qadhf and is to be subjected to qisãs (retaliation), as
distinguished from the offence of drinking khamr, because its permissi-
bility is part of his faith. The two jurists argue that he has not entered for
taking up residence, but for a need like trade and so on, therefore, he does
not become a resident of our territory, due to which reason he is facili-
tated in returning to the dãr al-harb. For the same reason a Dhimmi or a
Muslim are not subjected to qisãs if they kill him. He has agreed to abide
by the laws that help him attain his purpose, and these are the rights of
individuals. If he has agreed to seek justice then he must give justice too
and qisãs and the hadd of qadhf are the rights of these individuals. As
for zinã it is purely a right of the shar' (law). For the distinction drawn
by Muhammad (God bless him), he argues that the basis in the category
of zinã is the act of the male, while a woman is in a secondary position,
as we will be mentioning, God, the Exalted, willing. Consequently, pre-
vention of the hadd in the case of the primary actor requires that it be
prevented in the case of the secondary actor as well. As for prevention
in the case of the secondary actor, it does not lead to prevention in the
case of the primary actor. The parallel for this is where a major male has
intercourse with a minor girl or with an insane woman, or where a major
female facilitates the minor or an insane male.
Abü Hanifah (God bless him) argues that the act of the enemy
musta'min is zinã, because the prohibitions in the divine communication
are addressed to him, even though he is not an addressee for all our laws,
according to the authentic narration, in the light of the principle followed
by our School. Facilitating is an act that amounts to zinã, and it gives rise

--- Page 933 ---

BOOK XI: FIXED PENALTIES(cid:9) Al-Hidãyah(cid:9) 217
to the obligation of hadd for her, as distinguished from the minor and the
insane as they are not addressees of the communication. The parallel of
this disagreement is where a person is coerced by one willing, where the
willing woman is awarded the hadd, but not the man coerced, in his view.
According to Muhammad (God bless him), she is not subjected to hadd.
He said: If a minor male or an insane male commits zinä with a
woman who made him yield, then there is no hadd for him nor for her.
Zufar and al-Shãfi'i (God bless them) said that hadd is obligatory for her.
This is also one narration from Abu Yüsuf (God bless him). If a per-
son who is mentally sound has intercourse with an insane woman or a
minor girl (who is usually considered of age for sex), the man alone is
to be subjected to hadd. This is based upon consensus (ijmã'). The two
jurists ( Zufar and al-Shafi'i) argue that the obstacle from her side does
not prevent the awarding of hadd to him, so also an obstacle from his
side. The reason is that each one of them is to be held accountable for his
or her act. We argue that the act of zinã is realised on his part, while she is
merely the subject-matter of the act. It is for this reason that it is he who
is called the one committing intercourse and zinã. The woman is the pas-
sive party and she is the one whom zinã is committed, except that she has
been called a zãniyyah in the figurative sense, using the act of the active
party for the passive, like saying pleased for pleasing. Another reason is
that she is causing it through facilitation, therefore, the hadd is linked to
her for facilitating the evil of zinã. The act of zinã is the act of one who
has been commanded to avoid it and he has sinned by undertaking it, but
the act of the minor is not of this nature, therefore, hadd is not suspended
on jt.
He said: If a person is coerced by the sultan to commit zinà and he
does it, there is no hadd for him. Abü Hanifah (God bless him) used to
say earlier that he is to be awarded hadd, and this is the view of Zufar
(God bless him) as well. The reason is that intercourse on the part of
the male is not possible without erection of the penis, and erection is an
evidence of consent. Thereafter he retracted this opinion and said that
there is no hadd for him as the cause of duress is apparently in existence.
Further, erection is a vacillating evidence as it sometimes occurs without
intention, as it occurs on the basis of nature not voluntarily, like in the
41n other words, as the act of the minor is not zinã, her act cannot be called zinã
either, as distinguished from the act of the male in this case when he has intercourse
with a minor.

--- Page 934 ---

Al-Hidayah(cid:9)
218(cid:9) BOOK XI: FIXED PENALTIES
case of the person sleeping, therefore, it gives rise to shubhah. If someone
other than the sultan were to compel him, he is to be subjected to hadd
according to AbU Hanifah (God bless him). The two jurists say that he is
not to be awarded hadd in this case either as coercion is realised from a
person other than the sultan. The reason is that the effective factor is the
fear of death and that is possible on the part of another person too. In the
Imãm's opinion coercion on the part of another person is not persistent,
except rarely, for he is able to seek help from the sultan or from a group
of Muslims, and it is also possible for him to repel it himself by the use of
weapons. Something that is rare is not assigned a general rule, therefore,
hadd is not to be waived on account of this. This is distinguished from
the case of the sultan, because in this case he is not able to seek help from
another quarter nor is he able to revolt against him through the use of
weapons, therefore, the two cases are different.
A person who confesses four times in different sessions that he had
unlawful sexual intercourse with such and such woman, but she claims
that he married her or she confesses and the man says that he married
her, then there is no hadd for him and he is liable for the payment of
dower in this case. The reason is that the claim of nikãh is probably true
and it takes place between two parties, therefore, it gives rise to shubhah.
Consequently, when the hadd is dropped dower becomes obligatory due
to the sanctity of the prohibition of having sex.
He said: Each act that the imam, who does not have another imam
above him, commits, there is no hadd for him, except qisas, for which
he is liable, and he is also liable for financial claims. The reason is that
the hudüd are rights of Allah and their implementation falls within his
authority and of no other person, and it is not possible for him to imple-
ment the hadd against himself, for there is no benefit of doing so. This
is distinguished from the rights of individuals, because these are claimed
by the authorised heir either due to his own ability or through cooper-
ation and the force of the Muslims, and qisas as well as financial claims
are within these rights. As for the hadd of qadhf, the jurists said that the
predominant right in it is the right of the law (shar'), therefore, the rule
for it is the same as the rule for the remaining hudüd, which are the rights
of Allah. Allah, the Exalted, knows what is correct.

--- Page 935 ---

Chapter 99
Testimony of Hadd and its Retraction
He said: If witnesses testify with respect to a hadd that is time barred,
when they were not prevented from rendering it due to their great dis-
tance from the imam, their testimony will not be accepted for cases other
than qadhf. It is stated in al-Jami' al-Saghir: If witnesses testify against
the accused for theft or drinking of khamr or zinä after the passage of
a duration, it is not to be accepted, and the offender will be liable for
compensating the stolen goods. The principle in this is that the hudüd
are purely rights of Allah, the Exalted, and lapse on account of the limi-
tation of time, with al-Shãfi'i (God bless him) disagreeing with this. He
considers them the rights of individuals. Nor is the confession annulled
in his view on account of time, and it is one of the two methods of proof.
Our view is that the witness has an option of taking up two kinds of con-
sequences: rendering of testimony or concealing the offence. If the delay
is on account of concealment then coming forth with testimony after this
is due to their awakened malice or enmity that has brought them into
action, therefore, they are to be accused of this. If the delay was not due
to concealment, he has become afasiq who has sinned, and we are certain
of treating this as a prevention. This is distinguished from a confession,
because a person usually does not incriminate himself. The iadds of ama,
drinking of wine and sariqah are pure rights of Allah, due to which reason
it is valid to retract the confession in them after having made it, therefore,
time acts as limitation in these hudüd. As far as the hadd of qadhf is con-
cerned, there is a right of the individual in it insofar as it involves the
repelling of injury from him. Consequently, it is not permitted to retract
a confession in this offence after such confession has been made. Time
219

--- Page 936 ---

220(cid:9) Al-Hidayah(cid:9) BOOK XI: FIXED PENALTIES
does not act as a limitation in cases involving the rights of the individ-
uals. Further, the lodging of a complaint is a condition for it, therefore,
delay on the part of the witnesses can be construed to mean the absence
of a complaint. Consequently, it is not permitted to declare them fasiqs
in this case as distinguished from the hadd of sariqah, because making a
complaint is not a condition for this hadd as it is a pure right of Allah,
the Exalted, as has preceded. It is only stipulated for the financial claim
within it. Further, as the hukm revolves around the hadd being the right
of Allah, the Exalted, the proving of the allegation is not taken into con-
sideration in each individual case. In addition to this, theft is undertaken
in stealth at a time of inattention on the part of the owner, therefore, it
is imperative for the witness to identify him at once, and by concealing it
he becomes a sinful fasiq. Thereafter, the limitation of time, just as it pre-
vents testimony at the initial stage, it prevents the implementation after
the decision of the qadi, in our view, with Zufar (God bless him) disagree-
ing. Thus, if he runs away after part of the hadd has been implemented
(like stripes) and is captured after the passage of the time of limitation,
he is not to be subjected to hadd (again). The reason is that the passage
of time with respect to adjudication is also part of the hudfld.
The jurists disagreed about the duration of time for purposes of lim-
itation. Muhammad (God bless him) indicated in al-Jami' al-Saghir that
it was six months, for he said it is after a hin. This is what al-Tahãwi too
has indicated. Abü Hanifah (God bless him) did not fix a period for this
and left it to the discretion of the qãdi in each age. It is also reported from
Muhammad (God bless him) that he determined it to be one month,
because what is less than this amounts to acting swiftly. This is also one
narration from Abü Hanifah and AbU Yüsuf (God bless them), which is
correct. This is the position when between them and the qãdi the dis-
tance is not that of one month of travel. If it is such a distance then
their testimony is accepted, because what was preventing them was the
distance from the imam, therefore, the allegation of malice is not estab-
lished. Taqadum (limitation) in the case of the hadd of drinking is the
same according to Muhammad (God bless him), and according to the
two jurists it is to be determined on the basis of disappearance of smell,
as will be coming up in its chapter, God, the Exalted, willing.
If the witnesses testify against a man that he had intercourse with
such and such woman who is not present, he is to be subjected to hadd,
but if they testify that he stole from so and so and he is not present, he is

--- Page 937 ---

BOOK XI: FIXED PENALTIES(cid:9) Al-Hidayah(cid:9) 221
not to be subjected to hadd. The reason is that by absence, the complaint
becomes infructuous, and it is a condition in the case of theft, but not
zina. By her presence there is a likelihood that a shubhah may arise,' but
such probabilities are not taken into account in this case.
If they testify that he had intercourse with a woman whom they do
not know, he is not to be subjected to hadd, due to the probability that he
might have done so with his wife or his slave girl. In fact, there is a higher
probability of this.2 If he confesses having done so (with an unknown
woman), he is to be subjected to hadd, for he is supposed to know his
wife or slave girl.
If two witnesses testify that that he had intercourse with so and so
and coerced her, while two others testify that she submitted voluntar-
ily, the hadd is to be waived from both, according to AbU Hanifah (God
bless him), which is also the opinion of Zufar (God bless him). The two
jurists said that it is only the man who is to be subjected to hadd, because
of their agreement about the obligation in which one of them has com-
mitted an additional offence, which is coercion. This is not so in her case,
because her consent is the condition for the proof of the obligation as far
as she is concerned, and this is not established due to their disagreement.
The Imãm argues that zinã is a single act that is relevant to both, how-
ever, the two witnesses claiming consent have committed qadhf against
them. The hadd is waived for both due to the two witnesses of coercion,
because zinã on her part is under coercion, while qadhf tries to do away
with the the presumption of chastity in her case, thus, the two witnesses
of consent become litigants with respect to them.'
If two witnesses testify that he committed zinä with a woman at
Kufah, while two others testify that he did so with her at Basrah, the
hadd is waived for all. The reason is that the act witnessed is the act of
zinä and it differs with a difference in location and the nisäb of witnesses
(four) is not complete for either. The witnesses are not to be awarded the
hadd (of qadhf), with Zufar (God bless him) disagreeing, because there
is a probability (shubhah) of the unity of the offence taking into account
the form and the woman.
If the witnesses differ about the location within a single room, the
man and woman are both to be awarded the hadd. The meaning is that
'For she might claim that she is married to him or is his slave girl.
'For the presumption is that a Muslim does not commit zinä.
3Consequently, their testimony against them is not admissible.

--- Page 938 ---

222(cid:9) A1-Hidayah(cid:9) BOOK XI: FIXED PENALTIES
each set of two witnesses testify about a different location within the
room. This is based on istihsãn, while analogy dictates that hadd does
not become obligatory, because of the difference in location in reality.
The basis for istihsãn is that the two locations can be made to conform
by saying that the act began in one location of the room and ended at
another due to the lack of (too much) space in the room. In the alter-
native, the act was committed in the middle of the room, but those who
were in front treated it as one location and those at the back another.
If four witnesses testify that the man committed zinã with a woman
at Nukhaylah4 at sunrise, while four others testify that he committed
zinã with the woman at Dayr Hind, the hadd is to be waived for all. As
for the man and woman, because we are certain that one unascertained
group of witnesses is lying, and as for the witnesses due to the probability
of one of the groups being truthful.
If four witnesses testify against a woman about zinã and she is a vir-
gin, the hadd is waived from the two accused and from the witnesses as
well. The reason is that zinã is not established with the existence of vir-
ginity. The meaning of the issue is that women examine her and when
they say that she is a virgin, then their testimony is proof for the waiving
of hadd, but it is not testimony for establishing hadd. It is for this reason
that the hadd is waived in her case, and in their case it does not become
obligatory.
If four witnesses testify that a man has committed zinã when these
witnesses are blind or have been awarded hadd for qadhf or one of
them is a slave or has been awarded hadd for qadhf, then all of them
are to be subjected to the hadd of qadhf, but the person against whom
they rendered testimony is not to be awarded hadd. The reason is that
even a financial claim is not established through their testimony so how
can hadd be established, for they are not eligible to render testimony.
The slave is not eligible for witnessing or rendering testimony, therefore,
even the probability of zinã is not established here as zinã is established
through the rendering of testimony.
If they render such testimony and they are fasiqs or it is discovered
that they are fasiqs, they are not to be awarded the hadd. The reason is
that a fasiq can bear and render testimony even though in the rendering
of testimony there is a type of shortcoming due to the allegation ofJlsq.
4A place near Kufah.

--- Page 939 ---

BOOK XI: FIXED PENALTIES(cid:9) Al-Hidiyah(cid:9) 223
It is for this reason that if the qadI decides on the basis of the testimony
of a fasiq it is executed in our view. The probability of the existence zinã
is established through their testimony, however, taking into account the
shortcoming in their testimony due to the allegation of fisq the proba-
bility of absence of zinã is also established. It is for this reason that both
forms of hadd (zinã and qadhf) are prevented. The disagreement of al-
Shãfi'I (God bless him) will be coming up later based on his principle that
afasiq is not eligible for giving testimony, for he is like a slave in his view
(for purposes of testimony).
If the number of witnesses falls short of four, they are to be awarded
the hadd (for qadhf). The reason is that they have committed qadhf, for
their is no case when there is a shortage of number, and the moving out
of the category of qadhf is on the basis of number.
If four persons testify against a person that he committed zinã and
he is subjected to stripes on the basis of their testimony, but it turns out
that one of them was a slave, or was already convicted for qadhf, they are
to be awarded the hadd. The reason is that they have committed qadhf
for the witnesses are) ust three.
They are not liable, nor is the treasury liable, for the arsh (compen-
sation) to be paid to the person subjected to stripes. If he is subjected
to stoning (rajm, his blood-money (diyah) is to be paid by the trea-
sury. This is the position according to AbU Hanifah (God bless him).
The two jurists said that the arsh for stripes is also to be paid by the
treasury. This feeble servant, may Allah keep him in his protection, said:
The meaning is that if he wounds him. The same disagreement governs
the issue when he dies from the stripes. Accordingly, when the witnesses
retract their testimony, they are not liable for compensation, in his view,
but in the opinion of the opinion of the two jurists they are liable. The
two jurists argue that the obligation arising from their testimony in abso-
lute terms is stripes (that includes wounds and other things), because
avoiding some kind of injury is beyond the power of the executioner,
therefore, the obligation includes one who will wound and others. Con-
sequently, the injury is attributed to their testimony, and they are liable
in case of retraction. If they do not retract, the compensation becomes
obligatory for the treasury, because in this case the act of the executioner
is transferred to the qãdi, and he is the official representing Muslims, thus,
compensation from their wealth becomes obligatory. In this it resembles
cases of rajm and qisãs. According to Abü Hanifah (God bless him) what

--- Page 940 ---

Al-Hidyah(cid:9)
224(cid:9) BOOK XI: FIXED PENALTIES
is obligatory is the implementation of stripes, which amounts to painful
strokes, but not wounding or causing fatal injury. Thus, such stripes do
not injure, unless it is due to the executioner because of lack of training,
therefore, the error is to be confined to him. It is, however, not proper to
make compensation obligatory for him, according to the sound opinion,
so that the people are not prevented from implementing the hudüd out
of fear of financial penalties.
If four persons testify by transmitting the testimony of four wit-
nesses (hearsay), he is not to be subjected to hadd, insofar as there is an
increase in the shubhah and there is no necessity of bearing such shubhah.
If the original witnesses then come and testify that they saw the offence
at that location, even then he is not to be subjected to hadd. The meaning
is that they testify that they saw the actual crime themselves. The reason
is that their testimony has been rejected in some respects by the rejection
of the testimony of the secondary witnesses with respect to this offence
itself, for they were standing in their place with respect to the the com-
mand and bearing of testimony. The witnesses are not to be subjected to
hadd either, because their number is complete and the prevention of the
hadd, with respect to the accused, was due to a type of shubhah, and this
is sufficient for the waiving of hadd, but not its imposition.
If four witnesses testify against a man about the offence of zinä and
he is subjected to rajm, then each time a witness retracts he is to be
subjected to hadd and is made liable for one-fourth of the diyah (blood-
money). As for the compensation, the reason is that the witnesses whose
testimony still remains unretracted owe three-fourths of the amount due,
therefore, the one retracting is required to pay one-fourth of the amount
due. Al-Shfi'i (God bless him) said that what is obligatory is execution
and not wealth. This is based on his principle upheld for qisãs, and we
shall elaborate it in the topic of Diyãt, God, the Exalted, willing. As for
the hadd, it is the opinion of our three jurists (God bless them). Zufar
(God bless him) said that he is not to be subjected to hadd. The reason is
that if the retracting accuser (qadhif) is alive, then his qadhf is annulled
by the death of the person stoned, and if he is dead then the offender was
stoned through the judgement of the qãdi, and this gives rise to shubhah.
We argue that the testimony is converted into qadhf due to retraction,
because by retraction his testimony is vitiated and in such a state it is
deemed as qadhf of a dead man. As the proof is vitiated, what is based
upon it is also vitiated, and that is the judgement against him, therefore,

--- Page 941 ---

BOOK XI: FIXED PENALTIES(cid:9) Al-Hidãyah(cid:9) 225
it does not give rise to shubhah. This is distinguished from the case where
another person commits qadhf against him, because he is not a muhsan
with reference to another due to the existence of the judgement against
him.
If the hadd is still not implemented when one of the witnesses
retracts his testimony, all of the witnesses are to be subjected to hadd
and the hadd awarded to the accused is not enforced. Muhammad (God
bless him) said that the one retracting is to be awarded hadd exclusively,
because the testimony has been strengthened through the judgement,
therefore, it is not vitiated except in the case of the retracting witness.
Likewise if he retracts after the implementation of the judgement. The
two jurists argue that the implementation is on the part of the judicial
authority, therefore, it is as if one of them retracted prior to the deliv-
ery of the judgement, therefore, the hadd was not enforced against the
convicted person. When one of them retracts his testimony before the
judgement is handed down, all of the witnesses are subjected to hadd.
Zufar (God bless him) said that the witness retracting is alone to be sub-
jected to hadd, because his retraction is evidence of falsehood against
himself and not the others. We argue that their statements amount to
qadhf ab initio, and they become testimony when linked with the judge-
ment. Thus, when such testimony is not linked with the judgement it
remains qadhf, thus, they are subjected to hadd.
If there were five witnesses and one of them retracts he is not liable
for anything. The reason is that the entire claim is to be linked to the testi-
mony of witnesses who remain, which is the testimony of four witnesses.
If another witness retracts, he is to be subjected to hadd and is liable
for one-fourth of the diyah. As for the hadd, we have already mentioned
that. As for the financial penalty, three-fourths of it remains linked to the
witnesses who have not retracted, and what is taken into account is what
still remains and not the retraction of the witness who has retracted, as is
known.
If four witnesses testify against a man about the commission of zint,
after clearing the process of tazkiyat al-shuhüd, and he is stoned to
death, but it turns out that the witnesses were Magians or slaves, then
the diyah is to be paid by the muzakkis (who cleared them), according to
AbU Hanifah (God bless him). This means if they take back their tazkiyah
(in the meaning of admitting that they intentionally cleared them). AbU
Yüsuf and Muhammad (God bless them) said that the diyah is to be paid

--- Page 942 ---

226(cid:9) Al-Hidäyah(cid:9) BOOK XI: FIXED PENALTIES
by the treasury. It is said that this is the case when they say that we inten-
tionally approved the tazkiyah despite knowing who they were. The two
jurists argue that they praised the witnesses and deemed them good, and
that amounted to deeming the accused as good. It is as if they rendered
testimony about his chastity. The Imãm argues that testimony becomes
effective through tazkiyah, therefore, tazkiyah assumes the meaning of
'illat al-'illah (the cause of the underlying cause), therefore, the hukm is
attributed to it. This is distinguished from the witnesses of ihsãn, because
that is merely a condition. There is no difference between their clear-
ing them with the word "testimony" or that of a report, that is, if they
are reporting on freedom and Islam. If, however, they say, "They are 'adi
(morally upright)' but it turns out that they are slaves, the muzakkis are
not to be held liable, because even a slave can be morally upright. And
there is no liability for the witnesses. The reason is that their statements
did not have the effect of testimony. Further, they are not to be subjected
to the hadd of qadhf for they committed qadhf against a living person
and he is dead; his right cannot be inherited.
If the man is subjected to rajm and then the witnesses are found to
be slaves, the diyah is to be paid by the treasury. The reason is that he
complied with the command of the imãm, therefore his act is transferred
to the imãm. If, however, the imam undertook the act directly then the
diyah is obligatory for the treasury, on the basis of what we mentioned.
Likewise in this case. This is distinguished from the case where he exe-
cuted him, because in this case he was not following his order.
If witnesses testify about zinã against a man and say that they inten-
tionally looked at their private parts, their testimony is to be accepted.
The reason is that it is permitted to them to look due to necessity for
bearing witness, thus, it is a case similar to that of the physician and the
midwife.
If four witnesses render testimony about zinã against a man and he
denies that he is a muhsan, but he has a wife who has given birth to his
child, then he is to be subjected to rajm. The meaning here is that he
denies consummation after the existence of all the remaining conditions.
The reason for the decision is that after paternity is established legally it
amounts to attributing intercourse to him, therefore, if he were to divorce
her it would be followed up by the rule of retraction. Ihsãn is established
on the basis of such facts.

--- Page 943 ---

BOOK XI: FIXED PENALTIES(cid:9) Al-Hidãyah(cid:9) 227
If she has not given birth to his child and a man and two women
testify to his ihsãn, he is to be subjected to rajm. Zufar and al-Shãfi'i
(God bless them) disagree. Al-Shãfi (God bless him) followed his prin-
ciple that the testimony of women is not acceptable in matters other than
wealth. Zufar (God bless him) says that it is a condition in the mean-
ing of an underlying cause, because the penalty is extreme here in his
view, therefore, the rule is attributed to it and it comes to resemble a real
'illah. Consequently, the testimony of women is not to be accepted for
this purpose as a device for admitting shubhah. It comes to resemble the
case where two Dhimmis testify against a Dhimmi, whose Muslim slave
has committed zinã, that he emancipated him prior to the commission of
zinã; such testimony will not be accepted, on the basis of what we men-
tioned.' Our argument is that ihsãn is the name for virtuous traits and it
also prevents one from falling prey to zinã, as we have mentioned, there-
fore, it does not acquire the meaning of an underlying cause, and it is as if
they testified about it in a situation other than this. This is distinguished
from what has been mentioned, because emancipation is established by
the testimony of the two Dhimmis. It is not established for a prior date,
because the Muslim denies it or the Muslim is going to be injured through
it.
If the witnesses testifying to ihsän retract, they are not held liable, in
our view, with Zufar (God bless him) differing, and this is a sub-issue of
what has preceded. Allah, the Exalted, knows best.
'Accepting it would double the penalty for the slave.

--- Page 944 ---

228(cid:9) Al-Hidyah(cid:9) BOOK XI: FIXED PENALTIES

--- Page 945 ---

Chapter ioo
The Hadd for Drinking Khamr
If a person drinks khamr and is caught when the smell is still on him,
or they bring him in a drunken state and witnesses testify against him
about drinking, then he is to be subjected to hadd. Likewise if he con-
fesses and the smell is still on him. The reason is that the offence of
drinking has been proved and the period is not barred by time. The
basis for this are the words of the Prophet (God bless him and grant him
peace), "If a person drinks kharnr, subject him to stripes; if he repeats it,
subject him to stripes (again)."
If he confesses after the disappearance of smell, he is not to be sub-
jected to hadd according to Abu Hanifah and AbU YUsuf (God bless
them). Muhammad (God bless him) said that he is to be subjected to
hadd. Likewise if they bear witness against him after the smell is gone
along with the intoxication, he is not to be subjected to hadd accord-
ing to Abü Hanifah and Abü Yüsuf (God bless them). Muhammad (God
bless him) said that he is to be subjected to hadd. Taqadum (limitation
of time) prevents the acceptance of testimony by agreement, except that
it is determined in his view taking into account the hadd of zinã. The
reason is that delay is realised with the passage of time, while the smell
may sometimes exist due to another reason, as it is said: They say to me
you have drunk liquor, but I say to them I just had quince.' According to
the two jurists, the time is determined with the dissipation of the smell,
on the basis of the saying of Ibn Mas'üd (God be pleased with him), "If
'The tradition has been reported through many channels. The one from AbU
Hurayrah (God be pleased with him) has been recorded by the compilers of the four
Sunan. Al-Zayla'i, vol. 3, 347.
A fruit similar to a pear.
2
229

--- Page 946 ---

230(cid:9) Al-Hidayah(cid:9) BOOK XI: FIXED PENALTIES
you find the smell on him, subject him to stripes."' The reason is that the
subsistence of the effect is the strongest evidence of having used it. This
is converted to determination on the basis of time when it is difficult to
judge by smell. The distinction between smells is possible for one skilled,
but it can be confusing for one who is not adept in this.
As for confession, limitation of time does not annul it according to
Muhammad (God bless him), as in the case of the hadd of zinã, as has
preceded in its description. According to the two jurists, the hadd is not
to be awarded, except when the smell is fouiid. The reason is that the
hadd for drinking is established by the consensus (ijmã') of the Compan-
ions (God be pleased with them), and there can be no ijmã' without the
opinion of Ibn Mas'üd (God be pleased with him), and he stipulated the
existence of smell, according to what we have related.
If he is taken into custody by the witnesses and the smell is found on
him, or he is intoxicated, but they go from one town to another where
the imam is located, but his state changes prior to their reaching the
destination, he is to be awarded hadd in the opinion of all the jurists.
The reason is that this amounts to an excuse like the distance in the hadd
of zinã, and the witness is not to be objected to in this.
If a person gets intoxicated by drinking the mead of dates, he is to
be subjected to hadd, on the basis of what is related that 'Umar (God be
pleased with him) awarded the hadd to a villager due to intoxication from
nabidh (mead of dates). We shall elaborate the discussion about the hadd
of intoxication and the extent (number) of the hadd that is to be awarded
to the offender. God, the Exalted, willing.
There is no hadd on the person on whom the smell is found or who
vomits out khamr (without testimony about actual drinking). The rea-
son is that the smell is subject to interpretation and so is the intoxication,
that it may be due to coercion or under duress.
The intoxicated person is not to be awarded the hadd until it is
known that he has become intoxicated due to nabidh, and that he drank
it voluntarily. The reason is that intoxication from something that is
permitted is not liable to hadd like bhang (henbane) and mare's milk.
Likewise, the intoxication resulting from coercion is not liable to hadd.
31t is gharib in these words, however, 'Abd al-Razzaq has recorded it in the same
meaning. A1-Zayla'i, vol. 3,349.

--- Page 947 ---

BOOK XI: FIXED PENALTIES(cid:9) Al-Hidayah(cid:9) 231
He is not to be subjected to hadd until the effect of intoxication is gone,
so as to realise the purpose of deterrence.
The hadd for drinking khamr (wine) in the case of a freeman is eighty
lashes, due to the consensus (ijmã') of the Companions (God be pleased
with them). The strokes are to be distributed over his body like the hadd
of zinã, as has preceded. Thereafter his top garment has to be taken off
according to the well known narration (of the school). It is narrated from
Muhammad (God bless him) that it is not to be taken off due to the
lighter form of whipping as the text has not laid down the penalty. The
basis for the well known view is that we have already lightened the penalty
once, therefore, it cannot be done again.4
If the offender is a slave, the hadd for him is forty lashes, because
slavery reduces the penalty to one-half, as has been explained.
If a person confesses to drinking khamr (wine) or to intoxication,
but then retracts, he is not to be subjected to hadd, because it is purely a
right of Allah.
Drinking is established through the testimony of two witness, and
proof by confession is by confessing once. It is narrated from Abü Yüsuf
(God bless him) that he stipulated that the confession be twice. It is the
parallel of the disagreement in the case of sariqah, and we will explain it
there, God willing.
The testimony of women along with men is not to be accepted in
this offence, because in this is shubhah badaliyyah and the accusation of
wavering and forgetfulness.
The intoxicated person who is awarded hadd is one who (while in
that state) does not understand speech, whether less or more, and he
cannot distinguish between a man and a woman. This feeble servant
says: This is the position according to Abü Hanifah (God bless him). The
two jurists said that he is one who speaks irrationally and in a confused
manner, because this is the meaning of intoxication in the customary
meaning, and it is this that has been favoured by most Masha'ikh (jurists)
(God bless them). The Imãm argues that in hudüd the extreme factors are
to be given effect so as to increase the possibility of waiving the hadd, and
the extreme of intoxication is that it dominate reason completely depriv-
ing it of the ability to discriminate between one thing and another. What
4 That is, it was fixed at eighty stripes and not one hundred as in the case of zinã.

--- Page 948 ---

232(cid:9) Al-Hidayah(cid:9) BOOK XI: FIXED PENALTIES
is less than this is likely to be considered sober. What is considered effec-
tive in the size of the intoxicating container with respect to prohibition
is, by way of precaution, what leads to the state that the two jurists have
both held (with respect to irrational speech and confusion). A1-Shãfi'i
(God bless him) considers his gait, movements and swaying for purposes
of the effect of the liquor, however, these are things that vary from person
to person, therefore, there is no point in considering them.
The intoxicated person is not to be awarded hadd on the basis of his
confession, due to the greater possibility of his lying in his confession,
therefore, it is considered a factor for waiving the punishment. The rea-
son is that this is a pure right of Allah, as distinguished from the hadd
of qadhf, which includes the right of the individual, and an intoxicated
person is like a sober person for purposes of punishment as is the case
with all his other transactions.
If an intoxicated person becomes an apostate, his wife is not to be sep-
arated from him, because kufr is a matter of belief, which is not realised
through intoxication. This is the view of Abü Jlanifah and Muhammad
(God bless them). In the zãhir al-riwayah it is stated that it amounts to
apostasy. Allah knows best.

--- Page 949 ---

Chapter ioi
The Hadd of Qadhf
If a man commits qadhf (false accusation of unlawful sexual inter-
course) against another man, who is a muhsan, or against a woman, who
is a muhsanah, explicitly about the commission of zinã, and the person
so accused demands the implementation of hadd, then the imam is to
subject him to hadd of eighty lashes, if he is a freeman. This is based on
the words of the Exalted, "And those who launch a charge against chaste
women, and produce not four witnesses (to support their allegations),
flog them with eighty stripes." The meaning here, by consensus (ijma'),
is an accusation of zinã, and in the text there is an indication of this,
and that is the stipulation of four witnesses for that is specific to zinã.
The demand (complaint) by the person accused is stipulated, because his
individual right is involved in this insofar as it pertains to the repelling of
injury to him. The stipulation of ihsãn (chastity) is due to the text that we
have recited.
He said: The strokes are to be spread over his limbs, as has preceded
in the case of zinã, and his dress is not to be taken off, because its cause is
not definitive (qat'i), therefore, it is not to be applied with greater force as
distinguished from the hadd of zinã. Furs and quilted garments, however,
are to be removed, because they prevent pain from reaching his body.
If the offender is a slave, he is to be given forty lashes, due to the
existence of slavery.
The meaning of ihsãn is that the person accused (of zinã) be free,
sane, major, Muslim and chaste, that is, be free of conviction for the act
of zinä. Freedom is stipulated, because the term i/isãn is used to mean that
'Qur'an 24: 4
233

--- Page 950 ---

234(cid:9) Al-Hidayah(cid:9)
BOOK XI: FIXED PENALTIES
too. Allah, the Exalted, has said, "If any of you have not the means where-
with to wed muhsanãt (free believing women), they may wed believing
girls from among those whom your right hands possess,"2 that is, free
women. Reason and puberty are stipulated, because this injury does not
affect minors and the insane, because they are not capable of committing
the (legal) act of zinã. Islam is stipulated due to the words of the Prophet
(God bless him and grant him peace), "Anyone who associates another
with God is not a muhsan."3 Chastity is stipulated, because a person who
is not chaste is not hurt through the accusation, and the accuser is truth-
ful in his accusation.
If a person negates the paternity of another by saying, "You are not
your father's (son)," he is to be subjected to hadd. This is the case when
the mother of such person is a freewoman, because he has in reality com-
mitted qadhf against his mother. The reason is that paternity is negated
with respect to the person who has committed zinã and no one besides
him.
If a person says to another in anger, "You are not the son of so and
so:' taking the name by which his father is called, then he is to be sub-
jected to hadd, but if he says it when he is not angry, there is no hadd for
him. The reason is that in anger he intended the reality and meant it to be
an abuse, while in other cases he intends thereby a reprimand by denying
resemblance with his father in terms of manners and behaviour.
If he says, "You are not the son of so and so:' and means thereby
his grandfather, he is not to be subjected to hadd, because he is truthful
in his statement. If he were to attribute his paternity to his grandfather
even then he is not to be awarded hadd, because a grandson is sometimes
attributed to him in the figurative meaning.
If he says to him, "0 son of a zaniyah," when his mother is dead and
was a chaste woman, after which the son demands that the offender be
awarded hadd, he is to be awarded hadd, because he committed qadhf
after her death. Only the person who has been directly defamed with
respect to his paternity on account of an accusation against a dead per-
son can demand the implementation of hadd, and this person is the child
or the parent, because the injury is associated with him due to direct
blood relationship (being parts of each other), therefore, the accusation
Qur'ãn 4 25
2
This has preceded in the chapter on zinã. A1-Zayla'i, vol. 3, 353.
3

--- Page 951 ---

Al-Hidäyah(cid:9) 235
BOOK XI: FIXED PENALTIES(cid:9)
includes these persons in meaning. According to al-Shãfi'i (God bless
him) the right to demand prosecution lies with each heir, because the
right to claim the hadd of qadhf is inherited in his view, as we will elabo-
rate. In our view, the authority to demand prosecution is not available by
way of inheritance, but on the basis we have mentioned. It is for this rea-
son that it is established for one deprived of inheritance through murder,
and it is established for the child of a daughter just as it is established for
the child of a son with Muhammad (God bless him) disagreeing. It is also
established for the child of a child even when the child exists with Zufar
(God bless him) disagreeing with this.
If the accused (victim) is a muhsan,4 it is permissible for his unbe-
lieving son and slave to make a demand for the implementation of hadd.
Zufar (God bless him) disagrees with this saying that qadhf either applies
to him in meaning alone (when the parent accused is living at the time of
qadhf and then dies), and because the defamation reverts to him when
the method of acquiring this right is not inherited in our view, therefore,
it is as if it includes him in form as well as meaning (that is, as if the qadhf
was against him directly, but an unbeliever cannot be a muhsan). In our
view, the defamation is by way of qadhf of a muhsan, therefore, he is to be
subjected to hadd. The reason is that ihsãn, for the person to whom zinã
is attributed, is a condition so that defamation can be complete. There-
after, this defamation passes over in its complete form to the child, and
unbelief does not negate the eligibility of acquiring a right. This is differ-
ent from the case where the child is accused by way of qadhf himself, as
in that case the defamation is not complete due to the absence of ihsãn in
the person to whom zinã is attributed (being an unbeliever).
The slave does not have the right to demand prosecution of his mas-
ter with respect to the qadhf of his mother, who is free, nor does the son
have the right to demand prosecution of his father for the qadhf of his
mother who is free and a Muslim. The reason is that the master is not to
be punished on account of his slave and likewise the father on account of
his son. It is for this reason that the father is not subjected to retaliation
(qisds) on account of his son nor the master for his slave. If the woman
had a son from another man, he would have the right to demand it due
to the realisation of the cause and the absence of an obstacle.
4But dead.

--- Page 952 ---

236 (cid:9) Al-Hidãyah(cid:9) BOOK XI: FIXED PENALTIES
If a person accuses another by way of qadhf and thereafter the
accused person dies, the hadd is annulled. Al-Shãfi'i (God bless him)
said that it is not annulled. If the accused person dies when part of the
hadd has been implemented, the remaining is annulled, in our view with
which he also differs based on the rule that it is inherited in his view, while
in our view it is not. There is no disagreement that the right includes the
right of the law (shar') and the right of the individual. It has been laid
down for repelling the injury to the person subjected to qadhf, and it is he
who is to avail of this right exclusively, and from this perspective it is the
right of the individual. Thereafter the shar' provides for deterrence and
for this reason it has been called a hadd. The purpose of the deterrence
provided by the shar' (law) is to clear the world of corruption, and this is
a sign of the right of the shar'. To all this the ahkam stand witness. When
the two sides collide, then al-Shãfi'I (God bless him) inclines towards the
predominance of the right of the individual preferring it in consideration
of the need of the individual and the absence of need from the perspec-
tive of the shar'. We incline towards the predominance of the right of the
shar', because the right that the individual has is under the authority of
his master, thus, the right of the individual is secured through him. The
reverse of this is not like this, because the slave has no authority in seek-
ing satisfaction for the rights of the shar', except when deputised to do so.
This is the well known principle on the basis of which the various cases
that are disputed are settled, and among these is inheritance. The reason
is that inheritance applies to the rights of the individuals and not to the
rights of the shar'. Among these is also forgiveness( 'afw), because forgive-
ness by the one accused of qadhf is not valid in our view, but is valid in
his view. Among these is also the issue that compensation is not allowed
and limitation of time applies to it, but it does not apply according to
him. Abü Yüsuf (God bless him) according to a narration holds the same
view as al-Shãfi'i (God bless him) in the case of forgiveness. Among our
jurists are those who said that the right of the individual is predominant
and they derive the rules accordingly, but the first is the more authentic
opinion.
He said: If a person confesses to the commission of qadhf and there-
after retracts his confession, the retraction is not accepted. The reason is
that the person accused by way of qadhf has a right in the claim and he
considers the offender to be lying with respect to his retraction. This is

--- Page 953 ---

BOOK XI: FIXED PENALTIES(cid:9) Al-Hidayah(cid:9) 237
different from what is purely a right of Allah, because no one is there to
question his veracity (with respect to the retraction).
If a person says to an Arab, "0 Nabati (Nabatean)' he is not to be
subjected to hadd, because he intends a comparison with respect to traits
or the lack of eloquence. Likewise if he were to say, "You are not an Arab,"
on the basis of what we said.
If a person says to another, "0 son of water from the sky," then he
has not committed qadhf, because he intends a simile to show generosity,
magnanimity and purity, because water from the sky has been attributed
with purity and abundance.
If a person attributes the paternity of another to his paternal or
maternal uncle or to the husband of his mother (not his own father),
then he has not committed qadhf for each one of them may be described
as a father. As for the first, it is due to the words of the Exalted, "We
shall worship thy God and the God of thy fathers, of Abraham, Ismail
and Isaac,—the One (True) God,"' when Ismã'i1 was his uncle. The sec-
ond is due to the words of the Prophet (God bless him and grant him
peace), "The maternal uncle is a father."' The third is considered a father
for upbringing.
If a person says to another, "You have committed zinã (pronounced
with a hamzah) in the mountain," and then maintains that he meant
climbing the mountain, he is to be subjected to hadd. This is the
view according to AbU IIanifah and Abü YUsuf (God bless them).
Muhammad (God bless him) said that he is not to be subjected to hadd.
The reason is that the word with a hamzah is for climbing in reality. An
Arab poetess said: Rise up to the blessings by climbing the mountain. The
mentioning of the mountain emphasises the meaning. The two jurists
argue that the word is also used with a hamzah for the shameful act. The
reason is that some Arabs use the soft alif as a hamzah and the hamzah
as a soft aliph. The state of anger and hurling abuses will determine the
meaning to befahishah like the statement, "0 Zãni', or zana't?' The men-
tioning of the mountain will determine the meaning to be climbing when
it is used with 'ala, as it is used in that meaning. It is said that if he had
said, "You climbed (zana't) the mountain' he would not be subjected to
5Qur'an 2: 133
61t is gharib. A1-Zayla'i, vol. 3, 353.

--- Page 954 ---

238(cid:9) Al-Hidayah(cid:9) BOOK XI: FIXED PENALTIES
hadd, on the basis of what we said. It is also said that he will be subjected
to hadd on the basis of the reason we elaborated.
If a person says to another, "0 zãni," and the other replies, "No. In
fact, you," then both are to be subjected to hadd, because the meaning is
"In fact, you are a zãni." The reason is that it is a word used as a conjunc-
tion through which an error is grasped, so that the report about the first
person becomes a report about the second.
If a man says to his wife, "0 zaniyyah," and she says, "No. In fact,
you:' the woman is to be subjected to hadd, and there is no Wan. The rea-
son is that both have committed qadhf. His qadhf gives rise to li'ãn and
her qadhf leads to hadd. Commencing with hadd annuls li'ãn, because
a person who has been convicted for qadhf is not eligible for li'ãn. The
opposite does not lead to annulment (of hadd in her case) and is trans-
ferred to the annulment of li'ãn, because li'ãn too is in the meaning of
hadd. If she were to say, "I committed zinã with you," then there is no
hadd and no hi'ãn. The meaning is that she says this after he has called
her a zãniyyah. The reason is the existence of a suspicion in each of the
statements. It is possible that she meant the commission of zinã prior to
marriage in which case hadd becomes obligatory and not li'àn due to her
confirmation of this and the absence of a statement on his part. It is also
probable that she meant, "My zinã that was with you, because I did not
do it with anyone other than you' and that is the meaning in such a sit-
uation. Taking this into account, li'ãn becomes obligatory and not hadd
for the woman, due to the existence of qadhf on his part and its absence
on her part, therefore, we arrive at what we said.
If a person acknowledges a child as his and then denies it, then he is
to undergo the process of li'ãn. The reason is that acceptance of paternity
has become binding on him due to his acknowledgement, and by negat-
ing it later he has committed qadhf, therefore, he has to undergo li'ãn. If
he negates it first and then acknowledges it, he is to be subjected to hadd.
The reason is that when he declares himself to have lied, li'ãn is annulled,
because it is a necessary hadd in which it is imperative to declare each
other as indulging in falsehood. The basis of this is the hadd of qadhf.
When mutual imputation of falsehood has been annulled, it is reverted
back to its basis. In this there is a disagreement that we have mentioned
in the topic of Li'ãn. The child remains attributed to him, in both cases
due to his earlier or later acknowledgement. Li'ãn is valid without cutting
off paternity, just as it is valid without the existence of a child.

--- Page 955 ---

BOOK XI: FIXED PENALTIES(cid:9) A1-Hidayah(cid:9) 239
If he says (to his wife), "He is neither my son nor yours:' then there
is no hadd and no Wan. The reason is that he is denying the birth, and he
does not commit qadhf by doing so.
If a person commits qadhf against a woman, who has children with
her whose father is not known, or he commits qadhf against a woman
who has undergone li'ãn due to a child and the child is alive, or he com-
mits qadhf after the death of the child, then there is no hadd for him,
because of the existence of the signs of zinã with respect to her, and the
sign is the birth of a child whose father is not known. This leads to the
loss of chastity taking her situation into account, and chastity is a condi-
tion of ihsãn. If he commits qadhf against a woman who has undrgone
Wan without a child, then he is subjected to hadd, due to the absence of
the signs of zinã.
He said: If a person has prohibited sexual intercourse without lawful
ownership, then a person who commits qadhf against him is not to be
subjected to hadd, due to the loss of chastity, which is a condition for
ihsãn. The reason is that the person committing qadhf is truthful. The
rule for this is that if a person who commits prohibited sexual intercourse,
that is prohibited for itself, such an act does not give rise to hadd due to
qadhf. The reason is that zinã is sexual intercourse prohibited for itself. If
the intercourse is prohibited for some other reason (like that done during
menstruation, nifas or with a mukatabah and so on), the person commit-
ting qadhf will be subjected to hadd, for that is not zinã. Thus, intercourse
in other cases complete in all respects or in some respects is prohibited
in itself. Likewise in a case of ownership with perpetual prohibition (like
intercourse with a slave girl with whom his father has had intercourse),
but if the prohibition is temporary then it is intercourse that is prohib-
ited for some external reason. Abu Hanifah (God bless him) stipulates
that the perpetual prohibition must be one whose rule has been estab-
lished through consensus or a mashhür tradition, so that it is established
without vacillation. The explanation is that if a person commits qadhf
against a man who has had intercourse with a slave girl jointly owned
with another, then there is no hadd for him, due to the absence of own-
ership in some respects. Likewise if a person commits qadhf against a
woman who committed zina during the days when she was a Christian,
due to the bringing about of zinã in the legal sense and with the absence
of ownership, therefore, she was liable for hadd.

--- Page 956 ---

240(cid:9) Al-Hidãyah(cid:9) BOOK XI: FIXED PENALTIES
If he commits qadhf against a man who has had sex with his slave girl
who is a Magian, or his wife who was menstruating, or his mukätabah,
then he is to be subjected to hadd, because the prohibition exists with the
subsistence of ownership and it is temporary, therefore, it is prohibition
for an external reason and does not amount to zinã. According to Abü
YUsuf (God bless him) if he has intercourse with his mukãtabah, his ihsãn
is annulled. This is also the view of Zufar (God bless him). The reason is
that ownership has been removed with respect to intercourse, therefore,
he is liable to 'uqr for such intercourse. We say that the ownership of
the person subsists and the prohibition is for an external reason, for it is
temporary.
If a person commits qadhf against a person who has had intercourse
with his slave girl who was his foster sister, then he is not to be subjected
to hadd. The reason is that the prohibition is perpetual and this is the
authentic view.
If a person commits qadhf against a mukatab slave, who dies and
leaves enough wealth for payment of his remaining instalments, then
there is no hadd for this person, due to the possibility of s/iubhah with
respect to his freedom on the basis of the disagreement among the Com-
panions (God be pleased with them) about this issue.
If a person commits qadhf against a Magian, who had married his
mother and then converted to Islam, he is to be subjected to hadd
according to Abü Hanifah (God bless him). The two jurists said that he
is not to be subjected to hadd. This is based on the issue that the Magians
marry relatives in the prohibited degree and marriage is to be assigned
the rule of validity for matters between them in his view, with the two
jurists disagreeing. The discussion has preceded in the topic of Nikãh.
If an enemy (harbi) enters our territory on the undertaking of safe-
conduct and commits qadhf against a Muslim, he is to be subjected to
the hadd. The reason is that this offence involves the right of the indi-
vidual present in it, and the visitor has undertaken to abide by laws
affecting the rights of individuals. Further, he desires that he should not
be tormented, therefore, he is bound not to torment others, and the con-
sequence of the injury caused by him is hadd.
If a Muslim is subjected to hadd due to qadhf, his eligibility for giving
testimony is annulled, even if he repents. Al-Shãfi'i (God bless him) said
that it is acceptable if he repents, and this issue is discussed in the topic
of Shahãdãt.

--- Page 957 ---

BOOK XI: FIXED PENALTIES(cid:9) Al-Hidãyah(cid:9) 241
If an unbeliever is subjected to hadd for qadhf, he loses the right
to testify against the Ahl al-Dhimmah. The reason is that he can testify
against his own kind, therefore, it is rejected in order to complete his
hadd.
If he converts to Islam, his testimony is acceptable against them and
against Muslims. The reason is that this right to testify was acquired after
conversion to Islam, therefore, it does not fall under the rule of rejection.
This is distinguished from the case of the slave if he is awarded the hadd of
qadhf and is emancipated thereafter when he has no right to render tes-
timony. The reason is that he has no right to testify originally in the state
of slavery, therefore, the rejection of his testimony after emancipation is
for completion of his hadd.
If he has been given one lash on account of the hadd of qadhf, and
he converts to Islam, and is then given the remaining lashes, his testi-
mony is acceptable. The reason is that rejection of testimony completes
the hadd and becomes an attribute for him, while the hadd awarded after
conversion to Islam is part of the hadd, thus, rejection of testimony does
not become his attribute. It is narrated from Abü Yüsuf (God bless him)
that his testimony is to be rejected, because the smaller part is subservient
to the major, however, the first opinion is correct.
He said: If a person commits qadhf or zinä or drinks khamr more
than one time, and is awarded hadd, then it is sufficient for all of these
offences. As for the first two, the implementation of hadd is undertaken as
a right of Allah, the Exalted, for purposes of deterrence. The probability
of the purpose being achieved with the first implementation exists, and
this gives rise to the shubhah (suspicion) of this purpose being lost in the
second implementation.
This is distinguished from the case where he commits zinã, qadhf,
theft, and drinks khamr, because the purpose of one category is different
from another category, therefore, they cannot be treated as concurrent.
As for qadhf, the dominant right in it, in our view, is the right of Allah,
therefore, it will be linked with the other two offences. Al-Shãfi'i (God
bless him) says that if the person accused and the act committed, which is
zinã, are for different offences they cannot be merged, because the domi-
nant right in qadhf, according to him, is the right of the individual.

--- Page 958 ---

242(cid:9) Al-Hidayah(cid:9) BOOK XI: FIXED PENALTIES
101.1 TA'ZIR
If a person commits qadhf by accusing a male or female slave, or an
umm al-walad, or an unbeliever of zinã, he is to be subjected to ta'zir.
The reason is that it is the offence of qadhf, but the obligation of hadd was
prevented due to the absence of ihsdn, therefore, ta'zir became obligatory.
Likewise if he commits qadhf against a Muslim, without the impu-
tation of zin, by saying, "0 Fasiq," or "0 unbeliever?' or "0 khabth'
or "0 thief?' The reason is that he caused him mental torture and associ-
ated dishonour with him, and there is no possibility of using analogy in
hudüd, therefore, ta'zir becomes obligatory, except that ta'zir in the first
case (of accusing a non-muhsan of zinã) reaches the maximum level for
the offence, because it belongs to the genus in which hadd is obligatory,
but in the second case it is left to the discretion of the imam.
If he calls him, "0 donkey," or "0 pig?' he is not to be subjected to
ta'zir. The reason is that he has not associated dishonour with him due
to the certainty of the negation (of the name called as he is a human). It is
said that according to our custom he is to be subjected to ta'zir, because
it is considered an abuse. It is said that if the persons subjected to abuse
are respected persons like the fuqaha' and the elite, he is to be subjected
to ta'zir, because they will feel degraded by it. If, however, they are from
among the common people, he is not to subject them to ta'zir, and this
appears reasonable.
The maximum limit of ta'zir is thirty-nine lashes, while the minimum
is three. Abü Yüsuf (God bless him) said that the maximum for ta'zir is
seventy-five lashes. The basis for it are the words of the Prophet (God
bless him and grant him peace), "One who reaches the level of the hadd
in matters other than the hadd is a transgressor."7 When enforcement of
the hadd is obstructed, then AbU Hanifah and Muhammad (God bless
them) take into account the minimum number for the hadd, which is
the hadd for a slave in the case of qadhf, and they adopted this. It is forty
lashes and they reduced one lash from it. Abü Yüsuf (God bless him) con-
sidered the minimum hadd for freemen, because the original rule is that
of freedom, and then reduced one lash from it, according to one narra-
tion from him, which is also the view of Zufar (God bless him), and is
based on analogy. In the narration that we have mentioned, he reduced
71t is recorded by al-Bayahaqi. A1-Zayla'i, vol. 3, 354.

--- Page 959 ---

Al-Hidãyah(cid:9) 243
BOOK XI: FIXED PENALTIES(cid:9)
five lashes, and this is reported from 'All (God be pleased with him),' and
he followed his opinion. Thereafter, he determined the minimum in the
Book as three lashes, as what is less than that does not serve as a deterrent.
Our Mashã'ikh (jurists) have determined that the minimum is what the
imam considers to be so, therefore, he determines it to be the minimum
that will act as a deterrent, because it differs for different people. It is nar-
rated from Abfl Yüsuf (God bless him) that it depends upon the gravity
and triviality of the offence. It is also related from him that it is to be
treated in relation to each category of offence, thus, fondling and kissing
are to be associated with the hadd of zinã, while qadhf without zinã is to
be related with the hadd of qadhf.
He said: If the imam is of the opinion that he should combine with
lashes, awarded as ta 'zir, imprisonment as well, he may do so, because it
is suitable by way of ta'zir. The shari'ah has laid it down in general terms,
therefore, it is permitted that he deem imprisonment as sufficient or he
may combine it with lashes.
He said: The greatest intensity in lashes is in ta'zir, because it has
been lightened in terms of number, therefore, it is not to be lessened in
terms of intensity so that it does not lead to the loss of purpose (deter-
rence). Consequently, it is not lightened with respect to spreading it over
the different limbs.
This is followed by the hadd of zinä, because it is established through
the Qur'an, while the hadd of drinking khamr (its number) is established
by the opinion of the Companions (God be pleased with them). Further,
it is the gravest form of offence so that rajrn was laid down for it by the law
(shar'). Then comes the hadd of drinking, because its cause is definitive.
Thereafter the hadd of qadhf, because its cause is probable, due to the
possibility of the accuser being truthful. Further, there is enhancement
of standards in it due to the rejection of testimony, thus, it is not to be
enhanced in terms of intensity.
If a person is subjected to hadd or ta'zir by the imãm and he dies as a
result of it, then there is no liability for such death, because he undertook
the act under the directives of the law (shar'), and the act of one obeying
orders is not restricted by the assurance of safety, as in the case of the
cupper or the veterinary, but is different from the case of the husband
81t is gharib, but al-Baghawi has narrated it from Ibn Abi Layla. Al-Zayla'i, vol. 3,
354.

--- Page 960 ---

244(cid:9) Al-Hidãyah(cid:9)
BOOK XI: FIXED PENALTIES
trying to punish his wife as the permission there is unqualified and an
unqualified permission may be restricted with the condition of safety,
like walking in the street. Al-Shãfi'i (God bless him) said that in this case
diyah is imposed upon the treasury, because causing injury amounts to
an error in the implementation, because ta'zir is for disciplining. Diyah,
however, is imposed on the treasury, because the benefit of the act of the
person implementing the lashes reverts back to the Muslims generally,
thus, the financial burden is placed on their wealth. We say that when
the right of Allah is being exacted from him under His command, it is
as if Allah Himself has caused him to die without any intervening cause,
therefore, there is no liability.

--- Page 961 ---

A1-Hidãyah
BOOK TWELVE
Sariqah (Theft and
Highway Robbery)
Ch. io: The Legal Status of Sariqah (cid:9) 247
Ch. io: Theft That Gives Rise to Punishment of Amputation(cid:9) 251
Ch. ion: Place of Safe Custody (Hirz)(cid:9) 259
Ch. io: Mode of Amputation and its Proof (cid:9) 265
Ch. io6: Mode of Stealing Property and Related Issues(cid:9) 275
Ch. io: Highway Robbery (Qat' al-Tariq) (cid:9) 279

--- Page 962 ---

246(cid:9) A1-Hidiyah(cid:9) BOOK XII: THEFT

--- Page 963 ---

Chapter
102
The Legal Status of Sariqah
Sariqah in its literal meaning is the taking of something from another
by way of concealment and stealth. It is from this that the meaning of
eavesdropping is derived. Allah, the Exalted, has said, "But any that gains
a hearing by stealth."' In the technical meaning (in the shari'ah) some
additional stipulations have been added, and the elaboration of these will
be coming up before you, God, the Exalted, willing. The literal meaning,
however, is observed in it both initially and at the end, or in the beginning
and not later. For example, a person breaches a wall by stealth then takes
away the wealth of the owner by the use of force and openly. In the major
form of this offence (kubrã), I mean, the cutting off of the highway in
concealment from the monitoring of the imam for it is he who undertakes
the protection of the highway with his security force. In the minor form
(sughra) the concealment is from the vision of the owner or of the person
who stands in his place.
He said: If a sane and major person steals ten dirhams or a thing
that reaches the value of ten minted dirhams from a hirz (place of its
safe-custody) in which there is no shubhah, then it is obligatory to sub-
ject him to hadd. The basis for this are the words of the Exalted, "As to
the thief, male or female, cut off his or her hands: a retribution for their
deeds, and exemplary punishment from Allah, and Allah is Exalted in
Power, Full of Wisdom."' It is necessary to take into account aqi (rea-
son) and bulugh (puberty), because the offence is not committed without
them. Cutting of the hand is the compensation for the offence, there-
fore, it is essential that it be of substantial wealth, because the inclination
'Qur'an 15 :18
'Qur'an 5: 38
247

--- Page 964 ---

248(cid:9) Al-Hidãyah(cid:9)
BOOK XII: THEFT
to acquire trivial amounts is weak. Likewise the taking of insignificant
things is not concealed, thus, the rukn (essential element) is not realised
nor is there wisdom in deterring it for that is done in what is predomi-
nant. Determining it to be ten dirhams is the opinion of our school, but
according to al-Shai'i (God bless him) it is fixed at one-fourth of one
dinãr.3 According to Mãlik (God bless him) it is fixed at three dirhams.
These two jurists maintain that cutting of the hand during the period of
the Prophet (God bless him and grant him peace) was not undertaken
unless it reached the price of the mijann (shield made of leather),4 and
the minimum that is transmitted for its price is three dirhams. Adopting
the minimum assures certainty and is preferable. Al-Shãfi'i (God bless
him) says, however, that the value of the dinar during the period of the
Prophet (God bless him and grant him peace) was twelve dirhams, and
the figure three is one-fourth of it.
Our argument is that adopting the maximum in this category is
preferable so as to find a way for waiving the hadd. The reason is that
in adopting the minimum there is a shubhah (suspicion) of the absence
of an offence, and such suspicion leads to the waiving of the hadd in any
case. This is supported by the words of the Prophet (God bless him and
grant him peace), "There is no cutting of the hand, except in one dinar or
ten dirhams."' The term dirham is customarily applied to mean minted
coins. This should explain to you the stipulation of the term minted, as
was stated in the Book; it is the zãhir al-ri wãyah (authentic narration),
and is the correct opinion keeping in view the completion of the offence.
Consequently, if he were to steal ten nuggets whose value is less than ten
minted coins, cutting of the hand is not obligatory. What is considered is
seven mithqals in weight, as that is what is in practice in most lands. His
statement, "or a thing that reaches the value often minted dirhams," is an
indication that in things other than dirhams it is the value of the dirhams
that is taken into account even when the thing stolen is gold. Further, it is
necessary that there be a hirz (place of its safe-custody) in which there is
no shubhah, because shubhah leads to waiving of the hadd, and we shall
explain it in what follows, God, the Exalted, willing.
He said: The slave and the freeman for purposes of the cutting of
the hand are the same. The reason is that the text (nass) did not provide
'There are ten or twelve dirhams in a dinar according to different views.
41t is recorded by al-BukhãrI and Muslim. A1-Zayla'i, vol. 3, 355.
51t is recorded by al-Tahäwi in Shar al-Athar. AI-Zayla'i, vol. 3, 355.

--- Page 965 ---

Al-Hidyah(cid:9) 249
BOOK XII: THEFT(cid:9)
details and conversion to one-half is not possible, thus, the full penalty is
given for the sake of the protection of the wealth of the people.
Hadd becomes obligatory by the confession of the offender even if
made once. This is the view according to AbU Hanifah and Muhammad
(God bless them). AbU YUsuf (God bless him) said that cutting is not
undertaken except after a confession made twice. It is narrated from him
that these be made in two different sessions, because confession is one
type of proof and is corroborated by the other type, which is testimony.
We did the same in the case of zinã. The two jurists argue that the sariqah
(theft) stands proved by a single confession, therefore, it is deemed suf-
ficient as is the case with qisãs and the hadd of qadhf. The testimony is
not taken into account in this case, because excess in testimony reduces
the allegation of falsehood, but in a confession it does not provide such
a benefit for there is no cause for suspicion there. Further, the means
to retraction of the confession with respect to the hadd are not blocked
by repetition, while retraction with respect to wealth is not valid at all,
because the owner of the wealth deems him to be a liar. The stipulation
of additional times in the case of zinã is contrary to analogy, therefore, it
is better to confine such repetition to the issue of the text (shar').
He said: It becomes obligatory with the testimony of two witnesses,
due to the manifestation of the proof as is the case with all the remaining
rights. It is necessary, however, that the imam ask them about the method
of theft, its nature, time and place for additional precaution, as has pre-
ceded in the case of the hudüd. He is to imprison him until he has made
enquiries from the witnesses due to the charge against him.
He said: If a group participates in the theft, and each one of them
takes away wealth valued at ten dirhams, they are to be subjected to
amputation, but if what they take away individually is less then their
hands are not amputated. The reason is the obligating factor is the theft
of the nisãb (minimum amount for theft), and is to be worked out for
each one of them as a result of their offence, thus, the completion of nisãb
for each person is to be taken into account. Allah knows best.

--- Page 966 ---

250(cid:9) Al-Hidayah(cid:9) BOOK XII: THEFT

--- Page 967 ---

Chapter
103
Theft That Gives Rise to Punishment of
Amputation
There is no cutting of the hand for what is treated as insignificant and
free (permissible) in the Dãr al-Islam, like wood, grass, cane, fish, birds,
game, arsenic, clay and lime. The basis for this is the tradition of'A'ishah
(God be pleased with her), who said: "The hand was not cut during the
period of the Prophet (God bless him and grant him peace) for insignif-
icant things'1 that are trivial. Such a thing is one whose original species
is found to be free in its own form and is not desired for itself, for it is
trivial there being little desire to hoard it or be niggardly with respect to
it. Whenever such a thing is taken away without the willingness of the
owner there is no need to lay down a deterrent in the law (shar') for such
taking. It is for this reason that the cutting of the hand is not obligatory
in the case of things that are below the value of the nisdb. Further, the
place of safe-custody (hirz) in such things is deficient. Do you not see
that hay is thrown in front of the doors, and it is taken inside the house
for construction purposes and not for storing? The birds fly away and
game can flee. Likewise things of common ownership in game, as it is of
the same nature giving rise to shubhah, and hadd is waived on account
of it. Fish includes both salted and fresh, while birds include chicken,
ducks, and pigeons due to what we have mentioned, and also because of
the unqualified meaning of the words of the Prophet (God bless him and
grant him peace), "There is no amputation for birds."' It is narrated from
'It is recorded by Ibn Abi Shaybah. A1-Zayla'i, vol. 3, 360.
21t is gharib, and is recorded by 'Abd al-Razzãq and Ibn AM Shaybah. Al-Zayla'i, vol.
3,36o.
251

--- Page 968 ---

252(cid:9) Al-Hidãyah(cid:9) BOOK XII: THEFT
Abü Yüsuf (God bless him) that the punishment of cutting of the hand
is to be awarded for all these things except for clay, soil and dung. This is
also the view of al-Shãfi'i (God bless him). The evidence against them is
what we have mentioned.
He said: There is no cutting of the hand for things that are prone to
decay like milk, meat, and fresh fruit, due to the saying of the Prophet
(God bless him and grant him peace), "There is no cutting in thamar
(fruit) or kathar,"3 where kathar isjumar (edible tuber of the palm tree).
It is also said that it means wadi (small date palm). The Prophet (God
bless him and grant him peace) said, "There is no cutting in food,"4 and
the meaning, God knows best, is what is prone to decay and is ready for
eating, or whatever has the same meaning like meat and fruit, because the
hand is cut in things like wheat and sugar on the basis of consensus. Al-
Shãfi'i (God bless him) said that the hand is to be cut for these things due
to the words of the Prophet (God bless him and grant him peace), "There
is no cutting in thamar (fruit) or kathar, but when it is stored in a stone
basin, the hand is to be cut."' We would say that it is to be construed in
conformity with practice for what was preserved in the basin according
to their practice was fruit that was dried and in that there is amputation.
He said: There is no cutting of the hand in fruit that is on the tree
and in crop that has not been harvested, due to the lack of preservation
for safe-custody.
There is not cutting of the hand in intoxicating beverages, because
the act of the thief in acquiring them will be construed to be for spilling.
Further, some of these beverages are not deemed wealth, while there is a
disagreement about the value of others, thus, the suspicion (shubhah) of
the absence of value is created.
There is no cutting for the mandolin, because it is one of the instru-
ments of amusement.
There is no cutting for the mushaf even if it is ornamented with gold.
Al-Shãfi'I (God bless him) said that the hand is to be cut as it is mar-
ketable wealth and even its sale is permitted. A view similar to this is
narrated from Abü Yüsuf (God bless him). It is also narrated from him
31t is recorded byal-Tirmidhi, al-Nasã'i, Ibn Mãjah and others. AI-Zayla'i, vol. 3,361.
41t is gharib in these words, and has been recorded by Abü Dãwüd in the mursal
traditions. Al-Zayla'i, vol. 3, 362.
51t is gharib in these words. Another tradition giving the same meaning has been
recorded by Abü Dãwüd and al-Nasã'i. Al-Zayla'i, vol. 3, 362.

--- Page 969 ---

BOOK XII: THEFT(cid:9) Al-Hidayah(cid:9) 253
that the hand is to be cut if the ornamentation reaches the level of the
nisãb, because it is not part of the mushaf and is to be treated separately.
The reasoning underlying the authentic narration (zãhir) is that the per-
son acquiring it is to be construed to do so for recitation and study. The
reason is that it has no market value by virtue of its being writing. Its
preservation is for itself and not for the leather, pages (paper), or orna-
mentation, for these are secondary things, and secondary things are not
taken into account. It is as if someone stole a utensil in which there is
wine when the value of the utensil reaches the nisãb.
There is no cutting for the doors of a mosque, due to the lack of
custody, and this door becomes like the door of a house in fact better,
because things in the house are protected with the door of the house,
but the things in the mosque are not protected this way with the door,
so much so that there is no cutting for the theft of the assets inside the
mosque.
He said: There is no cutting for a cross made of gold, nor for chess
nor backgammon, because the person who takes them will construe it to
be for breaking, in conformity with forbidding the evil. This is different
from the dirham with engraving on it, because it has not been prepared
for worship, therefore, the doubt of permissibility of destroying it does
not arise. It is narrated from Abü Yüsuf (God bless him) that if the cross
is in a place of worship, there is no cutting of the hand, due to the absence
of safe-custody (hirz), but if it is present in another room the hand is to
be cut due to the completion of value and existence of hirz.
There is no cutting of the hand for abducting a minor (infant) who
is a free person even if he is wearing jewellery. The reason is that a free
person is not wealth, and the jewellery he is wearing is secondary to his
person. Further, the defence can be put up that the minor was taken to
pacify him or to carry him to his governess (nanny). Abü YUsuf (God
bless him) said that amputation is awarded if the child is wearing orna-
ments of the value of the nisab, because cutting will be obligatory by
stealing the jewellery separately, so also when taken with another thing
(child). The same applies when the thief steals a silver goblet that has
mead or broth in it. The disagreement here is about an infant who can-
not walk or speak so that he is not under his own control.
There is no cutting of the hand for taking away a grown up slave, for
that is treated as ghasb (misappropriation, abduction) or deception.

--- Page 970 ---

254(cid:9) Al-Hidayah(cid:9) BOOK XII: THEFT
The hand is to be cut for taking away a young (minor) slave due to the
occurrence of theft in conformity with its hadd, unless he can convey who
he is, because then this minor and the major are the same in respect of
control over themselves. AbU Yüsuf (God bless him) said that cutting of
the hand is not to be awarded even if he is a minor who does not under-
stand or cannot speak on the basis of istihsãn, because he is a human
being from one aspect and wealth from another. The two jurists argue
that he is wealth in the absolute sense due to the benefit to be obtained
from him or due to the withheld benefit to be derived from him despite
the obstacle (of being human as that does not eliminate his being wealth),
except that the attribute of being a human is associated with him (this
form of wealth).
There is no cutting of the hand for all kinds of bound books (dafatir),
because their purpose is what is contained in them and that is not
ma! (wealth) except for books of accounts, as what is in them is not
intended through the taking, and the (real) purpose is (to steal) the paper
(kawaghid).
He said: There is no cutting of the hand for the theft of a dog or a lion,
because those who are in the same species are found to exist freely in an
original state of permissibility and they are not desired for themselves.
Further, the disagreement among the jurists is obvious with respect to
marketable value of a dog, therefore, it gives rise to shubhah.6
There is no cutting of the hand for a tambourine, drum, harmonium,
or flute, because in their view these things have no marketable value.
According to AbU Hanifah (God bless him) the one who takes them will
take the plea of destroying them.
The hand is to be cut for taking teakwood, bamboo, ebony and san-
dalwood, because these are types of wealth that are protected for they are
precious in the eyes of the people, and they are not found in a free form
in the Dãr al-Islam.
He said: The hand is to be cut for stealing emeralds, rubies and green
jewels (from chrysolite), because these are the most sought after and pre-
cious forms of wealth and are not found freely in the undesirable original
permissible form in the Dãr al-Islam, therefore, they are like gold and
silver.
'Which gives rise to the waiving of the hadd.

--- Page 971 ---

BOOK XII: THEFT(cid:9) Al-Hidayah(cid:9) 255
When utensils and doors are made from wood, there is cutting of the
hand for stealing them, because through labour they come to be asso-
ciated with precious wealth. Do you not see that they are protected as
distinguished from mats, for craftsmanship has not come to dominate
their species so that they are spread out without protection? In mats from
Baghdad it is said that the hand is to be cut for its theft due to the domi-
nation of craftsmanship over the original material. The hand is to be cut
for doors that are not fixed (to the walls), and it is to be cut when they
are light and are not heavy for carrying by one person, because there is
no inclination to steal heavy doors.
There is no cutting of the hand for the deceiver, male or female, due
to the deficiency in hirz (place of safe-custody), neither for the embezzler
nor for one who extorts wealth, because he does this openly. The basis is
the saying of the Prophet (God bless him and grant him peace), "There is
no cutting of the hand for the embezzler, the extorter and the deceiver'7
There is no cutting of the hand for the grave-robber. This is the view
according to Abü Hanifah and Muhammad (God bless them). Abu Yüsuf
and al-Shafi'i (God bless them) said that he is liable for cutting of the
hand, due to the words of the Prophet (God bless him and grant him
peace), "We cut the hand of one who robs a grave."' The reason is that
the shroud is marketable wealth that is preserved in a hirz meant for it,
therefore, his hand is to be cut. The two jurists rely on the words of the
Prophet (God bless him and grant him peace), "There is no cutting of
the hand for the mukhtafi,"9 and he is the grave-robber (nabbãsh) in the
language of the people of Madinah. The reason is that shubhah has arisen
with respect to ownership, because the corpse has no ownership in reality
nor does the heir due to the prior need of the dead person (before the heir
became the owner). Further, a disturbance has occurred in the purpose,
which is deterrence, because the offence in itself is of rare occurrence. In
addition to this what he (Abü Yüsuf) has relied upon is not marfu' or it
is interpreted to apply to siyasah offences. If the grave is inside a locked
room, then the issue is disputed on the same grounds, according to the
sound narration, on the basis of what we said. Likewise if a person steals
71t is recorded by all the sound compilations. Al-Zayla'i, vol. 3, 363-65.
'It is related by al-Bayhaqi. Al-Zayla'i, vol. 3, 366.
9This is a gharib tradition, but Ibn Abi Shaybah has recorded a tradition conveying
the same meaning. Al-Zayla'i, vol. 3, 367.

--- Page 972 ---

256(cid:9) Al-Hidayah(cid:9) BooK XII: THEFT
from the coffin while going with a caravan when the corpse is inside it,
due to what we said.
The hand of the person who steals from the treasury (bayt al-ma!)
is not to be cut, because this is public wealth and he is one of them, nor
when he steals from wealth in which the thief is a co-owner, due to what
we have said.
If a person is owed dirhams by another and he steals from him, his
hand is not to be cut, because this amounts to the satisfaction of his
claim, and prompt and deferred are in the same position with respect
to this, on the basis of istihsãn. The reason is that delay is due to the
postponement of the demand (for satisfaction). Likewise if he steals in
excess of his right, because he becomes a co-owner with him in the stolen
amount to the extent of his claim.
If he steals goods from him, his hand is to be cut, because he does
not have the authority to seek satisfaction from them, except on the basis
of sale by consent. It is narrated from AbU Yüsuf (God bless him) that
his hand is not to be cut for he has the right, according to some jurists,
to acquire them in satisfaction of his claim or as property pledged with
him for his claim. We say that this is a statement that does not rely on
an authentic evidence, therefore, it is not to be acknowledged without
linking it to a suit filed for it, and if he does so the hadd will be waived.
The reason is that it is the case of probability in a matter that is subject to
disagreement. If his claim was for dirhams and he stole dinars from him,
it is said that his hand will be cut as he does not have the right to take
them. It is also said that his hand is not to be cut as currencies are a single
species.
If a person steals some 'ayn (something that can be taken into phys-
ical possession) and his hand is cut for it, but thereafter he returns it
and then steals it again when this thing is in the same physical state, his
foot is not to be cut. Analogy dictates that his hand is to be cut, and it
is one narration from Abü Yüsuf (God bless him). It is also the opinion
held by al-Shäfi'i (God bless him), due to the saying of the Prophet (God
bless him and grant him peace), "If he repeats it, cut his hand (again),""
without going into details. The reason that the second theft is complete
like the first. In fact, it is more atrocious due to the implementation of
the (first) deterrent punishment, and it is as if the owner had sold it to
'Olt is recorded by al-Dar'qutni in his Sunan. Al-Zayla'i, vol. 3, 368.

--- Page 973 ---

BOOK XII: THEFT(cid:9) Al-Hidäyah(cid:9) 257
the thief and then bought it from him after which theft was committed.
We maintain that the cutting of the hand led to the elimination of protec-
tion for the stolen property, as will be known in what follows, God, the
Exalted, willing. By returning the property to the owner the protection
returned in reality, but a doubt (shubhah) remained with respect to the
existence of protection taking into account the unity of ownership and
subject-matter as well as the existence of the cause (of loss of protection),
which is cutting of the hand. This is distinguished from what has been
said (with respect to sale by abü Yüsuf), because ownership becomes dif-
ferent with a difference in the cause. Further, repetition of the offence
by such a person (with respect to the same property) is rare due to his
having borne the hardship of the deterrent, therefore, implementation
once again becomes devoid of purpose, due to the rare occurrence of the
offence. It is as if the person subjected to the hadd of qadhf commits
qadhf against the first person again.
If the state of the stolen property changes, for example, it was yarn
when he stole it and his hand was cut then he returned it and it was
woven, but he repeats the offence and steals the cloth, his foot is to be cut.
The reason is that the 'ayn has changed its form, therefore, a person mis-
appropriating the yarn and weaving it will come to own the cloth. This is
the sign of alteration in each subject-matter. When it stands altered, shub-
hah arising from the unity of subject-matter and amputation is negated,
thus, cutting of the hand a second time becomes obligatory. Allah knows
what is correct.

--- Page 974 ---

258(cid:9) Al-Hidayah(cid:9) BOOK XII: THEFT

--- Page 975 ---

Chapter
104
Place of Safe Custody (Hirz)
If a person steals from his parents or children or relatives in the prohib-
ited degree, his hand is not to be cut. In the first case, which is relation-
ship by birth, there is free sharing of wealth and entry into the hirz. The
second is due to the second meaning (entry into the hirz without permis-
sion). It is for this reason that the law (shar') has permitted glancing at
visible locations of adornment (parts of the body) as distinguished from
friends with whom an enmity is created through theft. In the second case
there is a disagreement with al-Shãfi'i (God bless him), because he asso-
ciates them with distant relatives, and we have elaborated this in the topic
of emancipation.
If he steals from the house of a relative in the prohibited degree assets
belonging to another, his hand is not cut, but if he steals his own assets
from the house of another (not a relative) his hand is cut, on the basis of
entry into the hirz with and without permission.
If a person steals from his foster mother, his hand is cut. According to
AbU Yüsuf (God bless him) his hand is not to be cut, because he enters her
house without permission and bashfulness. This is distinguished from
the case of the foster sister, due to the absence of such a relationship
according to custom. The reasoning underlying the authentic narration
is that there is no kinship and the prohibition without kinship is not
respected, like the prohibition established due to zinã and kissing with
lust. Closer than this is the foster sister. The reason is that fosterage is
not publicised, therefore, there is no sharing of wealth or free entry into
the hirz in order to avoid allegations of suspicion. This is different from
blood kinship.
259

--- Page 976 ---

260(cid:9) Al-Hidayah(cid:9) BOOK XII: THEFT
If one spouse steals from the other spouse or a slave from his mas-
ter or from the wife of his master or from the husband of his mistress,
there is no cutting of the hand, due to the existence usually of permis-
sion for entry. If one of the spouses steals exclusively from the place of
safe-custody (hirz) of the other spouse when both do not reside in such
a place, then the rule is the same in our view. Al-Shãfi'i (God bless him)
disagrees. The reason (for our argument) is that there is a free sharing
of wealth among them in practice and implication (of the relationship of
marriage). This is a parallel case to the disagreement in the case of testi-
mony.'
If the master steals from his mukatab slave, his hand is not to be cut,
because he has a right in his earning.
Likewise a person who steals from the spoils, because he has a share
in them and this is related from 'All (God be pleased with him) both with
respect to the waiving of hadd and the underlying rationale.
He said: hirz is of two types: (1) hirz for the meaning of protection
within it, like rooms and houses, and (2) hirz through a guard. This
feeble servant (the Author) says: Hirz is essential, because the meaning
of stealth is not established without it. Thereafter it sometimes exists
through location, and that is the location prepared for guarding assets,
like houses, rooms, trunks and shops. At other times it exists through a
guard like a person sitting in the street or in a mosque when he has some
baggage with him, then he is the guard for these assets. The Prophet (God
bless him and grant him peace) ordered the amputation of the hand of
the person who stole the cloak of Safwãn from under his head when he
was sleeping in the mosque.'
In a hirz based on location, custody through a guard is not taken
into account. This is correct, because it is protected without a guard, and
such a hirz is a room even when it does not have a door or has one, but it
is open, so that a person stealing from there is subjected to amputation.
The reason is that a structure is for purposes of safe-custody, except that
there is no cutting of the hand without his bringing the property out of it,
because of the existence of prior possession of the owner. This is different
from the hirz through a guard insofar as cutting of the hand becomes
obligatory as soon as he takes it away from him, due to the elimination of
'The Hanafis say that the testimony of one spouse is not accepted in favour of
another, but the Shafi'is in one view say that it is accepted.
21t is recorded by Abu Dãwud, Ibn Majah and al-Nasä'i. A1-Zayla'i, vol. 3, 368.

--- Page 977 ---

BOOK XII: THEFT(cid:9) Al-Hidayah(cid:9) 261
the possession of the owner by the mere act of taking thereby completing
the act of theft. There is no difference between the situations where the
guard is asleep or is awake and whether the goods are under him or lying
next to him. This is the correct view, because the person sleeping next
to his goods is considered to be guarding his things in practice. It is for
this reason that the custodian and the borrower of goods (sleeping next
to the goods) is not held liable for compensation, because in such a case
it is not the loss of goods, as distinguished from what has been preferred
for fatwa.
He said: If a person steals from a hirz or from a place other than the
hirz when the owner is next to the property guarding it, his hand is to be
cut, because he has stolen from one of the two types of hirz.
There is no cutting of the hand for a person who steals wealth from a
public bath or a house in which entry to the public is permitted, due to
the existence of permission in practice or actual for entry, therefore, the
hirz is demolished. This includes the shops of traders and public inns,
except when theft is committed there at night, because they are built for
custody of assets, and the permission pertains to the day.
If a person steals assets from a mosque when the owner (custodian)
is there, his hand is to be cut, because it is protected by a guard. The
reason is that a mosque is not built for safe-custody of assets, therefore,
the wealth inside is not protected through hirz of location. This is dis-
tinguished from a public bath, and a room that is open to the public for
entry so that the hand is not cut, because it is built for safe-custody, there-
fore, the hirz is by location (though undone by free-entry) and hirz by a
guard is not taken into account.
There is no cutting of the hand for the guest who steals from his host,
because the room (house) is no longer a hirz as far as he is concerned due
to the permission given to him for entry. The reason is that he has the
same status as the residents of the house, therefore, his act is misappro-
priation and not theft.
If a person commits theft of something and does not move it out of
the hirz his hand is not to be cut, because the entire house is a single hirz,
therefore, it is essential to move it out of it. The reason is that the house
and what is in it is in the possession of the owner conceptually, therefore,
leaving the stolen thing gives rise to a shubhah of not taking.

--- Page 978 ---

262(cid:9) Al-Hidayah(cid:9) BOOK XII: THEFT
If the house has a number of rooms and the thief brings the stolen
goods out into the courtyard, his hand is to be cut, because each room
with respect to its occupant is an independent hirz in itself.
If one of the occupants of the rooms in the house enters a room by
stealth and steals from it, his hand is to be cut, due to what we have
elaborated.
If a thief makes a hole in the wall of a room, enters it, takes wealth
and hands it over to another thief outside (while he is still inside), then
there is no cutting of the hand for them, because the first one is not
found to have come out and thus the protective possession of the owner
is acknowledged over the wealth prior to its being brought out. The sec-
ond is not found to violate the hirz, therefore, the act of sariqah has not
been completed by either. It is narrated from Abü Yüsuf (God bless him)
that if the one inside stretches his hands outside and delivers the goods
to the one outside then the cutting of the hand is for the one inside. If
the one outside inserted his hands inside and took the goods from the
hands of the one inside, then the cutting of the hand is for the one who
was outside. This is based on the issue that will be coming up later. God,
the Exalted, willing.
If he flings the goods outside and then goes out and picks them up
his hand is to be cut. Zufar (God bless him) said that his hand is not
to be cut, because throwing the goods outside does not give rise to the
obligation of amputation. It is as if he went out and did not pick up the
stolen goods. Likewise taking the goods from the street is as if someone
else took the goods. We argue that throwing the goods is a device thieves
use due to the difficulty of coming out with the goods or because they
(some) want to be free to fight with the owner or for running away. His
act is not prevented by the possession of the owner, therefore, the entire
activity is deemed a single act. If he does not pick up the goods when he
comes out then he is a waster and not a thief.
He said: Likewise if he loads them upon a donkey and drives him out,
the movement of the donkey is attributed to him as he is driving it.
If a group enters a hirz and some of them commit the taking, the
hands of all are to be cut. This feeble servant (Author) says: This is based
upon istihsãn. Analogy dictates that the one carrying the stolen goods out
should alone be subjected to cutting, which is the opinion of Zufar (God
bless him). The reason is that he is found to move the goods outside,
therefore, the theft is completed by him. We maintain that theft has been

--- Page 979 ---

Al-Hidayah(cid:9) 263
BOOK XII: THEFT(cid:9)
committed by all due to collaboration as is the case with sariqah kubrã.
The reason is that the practice among them is that some carry the goods
and the rest buckle up for defence. If cutting is prevented in this case, it
will lead to the blocking of the door of hadd (in this category).
He said: If a person makes a hole in a room and puts his hand inside
to take something out, his hand is not to be cut. It is narrated from Abfl
Yflsuf (God bless him) in al-Imlã' that his hand is to be cut, because he
brought out the wealth from the hirz and that is the objective. Thus, entry
is not to be stipulated for it as in the case where he inserts his hand into a
safe for cash and brings out Ghitrifi dirhams. We argue that the violation
of the hirz is stipulated for the completion of the offence and to elimi-
nate the shubhah of absence of hirz. Completion with respect to entry is
where such entry is considered possible. Entry into a house is in the nor-
mal way and this is distinguished from opening a trunk, because what is
possible there is insertion of the hand and not full entry. It is also dis-
tinguished from what has preceded where some thieves are carrying the
goods, because that is what is done in practice.
If a person cuts (and takes) a purse that is outside the sleeve, his hand
is not to be cut, but if he puts his hand inside the sleeve, it is to be cut.
The reason is that in the first case the knot is on the outside, therefore,
by cutting the taking occurs on the outside, thus, the violation of the hirz
has not occurred. In the second case the knot is on the inside, therefore,
by cutting taking from the hirz is realised, and the hirz is the sleeve. If in
place of cutting he opens the knot, then, in both situations the response
will be reversed, due to the inversion of the underlying cause ('illah). It is
narrated from AbU Yflsuf (God bless him) that the hand will be cut in all
circumstances, because the purse is protected either by the sleeve or by
the owner himself. We say that the hirz is the sleeve for he is relying on
it for protection, while his own purpose is to complete the journey or to
rest, therefore, it is as if it is the pack on the camel's back.
If he steals a camel from a train of camels or a the load (on the camel),
his hand is not to be cut. The reason is that it is intended to be a hirz,
therefore, it gives rise to the shubhah of the absence of hirz, because the
driver, the guide and the rider have as their purpose the undertaking of
the journey and the transfer of goods and not protection. Thus, it is said
that if there is someone with the loads who is following them to guard
them, then the hand is to be cut. If he cuts up the load pack and takes
from it, his hand is to be cut, because the bags in such a situation are a

--- Page 980 ---

264(cid:9) Al-Hidayah(cid:9) B00KXII: THEFT
hirz, because by placing the goods in the bags, the intention is to protect
them, as in the case of the sleeve. Consequently, the taking is from a hirz,
therefore, the hand is to be cut.
If he steals a camel bag, in which there are goods, while the owner is
protecting it, but is asleep, his hand is to be cut. The meaning is that if
the bag is in a place that is not a hirz, like the highway and so on, so that
the hirz is through the presence of the owner due to his being on watch
for their protection. This is the case where the consideration is given to
the normal watch by sitting next to the bags. Sleep in this situation is
reckoned as hirz in practice. Likewise sleeping nearby, according to what
we preferred earlier. It is mentioned in some manuscripts that "when he is
sleeping on top of the bags or where he is able to protect them' and this
affirms what we have stated about the preferred opinion. Allah knows
what is correct.

--- Page 981 ---

Chapter
105
Mode of Amputation and its Proof
He said: The right hand of the thief is to be cut from the forearm and is to
be singed/cauterised. The cutting is undertaken on the basis of what we
recited earlier. The selection of the right hand is based on the recitation
of 'Abd Allah ibn Mas'üd (God be pleased with him). The selection of
the zand (wrist, forearm) is due to the reason that term yad includes the
entire arm up to the armpit, and this joint, I mean wrist, is something
about which there is certainty. The reason is that there are sound reports
about the ordering of the amputation in the case of the hand of the thief
from the wrist by the Prophet (God bless him and grant him peace).'
Cauterisation is undertaken due to the saying of the Prophet (God bless
him and grant him peace), "Cut it and cauterise it."' The reason is that if
it is not cauterised it can lead to death, and the hadd is a deterrent not a
killer.
If he steals a second time, his left foot is to be cut, and if he steals
a third time, there is no cutting and he is to be left in the prison till he
repents. This is istihsän, and he is to be given ta'zir as well, as mentioned
by the Mashã'ikh (jurists) (God bless them). Al-Shãfi'i (God bless him)
said that on the third offence his left hand is to be cut and on the fourth
his right foot is to be cut, due to the saying of the Prophet (God bless him
and grant him peace), "If someone steals cut (his hand). If he repeats the
offence cut again. If he repeats again cut again."' It is also related with all
'There are traditions about this and one of them is recorded by al-Dar'qutni. Al-
Zayla'i, vol. 3, 370.
1t is recorded by al-Hãkam in al-Mustadrak. A1-Zayla'i, vol. 3, 371.
2
1t is recorded by Abu DãwUd. Al-Zaylal, vol. 3, 371.
3
265

--- Page 982 ---

266(cid:9) Al-Hidayah(cid:9) BOOK XII: THEFT
the details, as is expressed in his opinion.4 The reason is that the third
offence is just like the first in being an offence. In fact, it is more grievous,
therefore, it calls for laying down the hadd by the law (shar'). We rely on
the saying of 'MI (God be pleased with him), "I feel afraid of Allah, the
Exalted, if I do not leave him with a hand with which to eat and to per-
form istinja' and a leg on which he can walk."' He then argued with the
rest of the Companions (God be pleased with them) and was able to con-
vince them, therefore, an ijma' occurred. Further, it amounts to killing
him in meaning for it is the loss of all benefits of being alive, and the hadd
is a deterrent (not a destroyer). In addition to this, it is of rare occurrence
and deterrence is stipulated in things that are of widespread occurrence,
as distinguished from qisãs as that involves the right of the individual,
therefore, retaliation is extracted by force as far as is possible for the sat-
isfaction of his right. The tradition has been criticised by al-Tahãwi (God
bless him) for authenticity, or it is construed to be applicable to siyãsah.
If the thief has a paralysed or amputated left hand or an amputated
right leg, amputation is not to be enforced. The reason is that in doing
so there is a loss of the benefit of grasping or walking. Likewise if his right
leg is paralysed, on the basis of what we said. Likewise if the thumb of his
left hand is cut off or paralysed, or two of the fingers of the hand other
than the thumb, because the strength of grasping comes from the thumb.
If one finger other than the thumb is cut off or paralysed, his hand will
be cut, because the loss of one finger does not create an apparent dys-
function in grasping, as distinguished from two fingers for they assume
the position of the thumb in the loss of grasping.
If the judge says to the executioner cut off the right hand of this man
for a theft that he has committed, and he cuts off his left hand inten-
tionally or by mistake, then he is not liable for anything according to
AbU Hanifah (God bless him). The two jurists said that he is not liable
in case of a mistake, but is liable for the intentional cutting. Zufar (God
bless him) said that he is liable for a mistake as well, and this is based upon
qiyãs (analogy). The meaning of mistake here is a mistake in ijtihãd.6 As
for a mistake in distinguishing the right from the left, it is not deemed
an excuse. It is said that this mistake is to be deemed a justified excuse
41t is recorded by al-Dar'qutni and al-Tabaräni. A1-Zayla'i, vol. 3,373.
51t is recorded by Muhammad ibn al-Hasan al-Shaybani (God bless him) in Kitab
al-A thar. A]-Zayla'i, vol. 3, 374.
'As the text says, "Cut of their hands."

--- Page 983 ---

BOOK XII: THEFT(cid:9) Al-Hidãyah(cid:9) 267
as well. He (Zufar) says that he has cut off a hand that was protected (by
the law), and a mistake in the case of the right of the individual cannot
be overlooked, therefore, he is to be compensated. We say that he made
a mistake in his ijtihãd as the text does not identify either the right or
the left, and a mistake in ijtihãd is to be overlooked. The two jurists say
that he cut a protected limb without justification and there is no possi-
bility of interpretation as he intentionally committed injustice, therefore,
it is not to be forgiven even though it was a matter subject to ijtihãd. It
was essential that retaliation be imposed in this case, however, it was pre-
vented due to shubhah. According to Abü Hanifah (God bless him) he
destroyed it leaving behind the same type that is better than it (that is,
the right hand), therefore, it is not to be deemed as destruction. It is like
the witnesses testifying against another that he sold a man's wealth for
a reasonable price and then retracting their testimony.7 Accordingly, if a
person other than the executioner had cut it off, he would not be liable
either, which is correct. If the thief extended his left hand saying that it
was his right, he would not be liable by agreement, because he cut the
hand under the thief's order. Thereafter, in the case of intentional cut-
ting, according to AbU Hanifah (God bless him), there is a liability for the
thief to compensate the stolen wealth, because the cutting has not been
implemented as a hadd. In mistake too the same method is followed, but
according to the method of ijtihãd (preferred by Abü Yftsuf) the thief is
not liable.
The hand of the thief is not to be cut unless the person whose prop-
erty has been stolen is present and demands adjudication for the theft.
The reason is that litigation is a condition for proving it. There is no dif-
ference between confession and testimony in our view. A1-Shãfi'i (God
bless him) disagrees with respect to confession.' The reason is an offence
against the wealth of another cannot be proved without litigating the
matter with him.
Likewise if he is absent at the time of cutting of the hand, because
satisfaction is through adjudication in cases of hudüd.
The custodian (holding a deposit), the usurper, and the person who
has made a transaction of nba9 can demand the cutting of the hand of
the thief who has stolen from them. The depositor too has a right to
'They are not liable for the loss.
'Meaning thereby that in case of confession a trial is not needed.
9Like giving ten dirhams and taking twenty.

--- Page 984 ---

268(cid:9) Al-Hidayah(cid:9) BooK XII: THEFT
demand cutting of the hand. Likewise the person whose property has
been usurped. Zufar and al-Shãfi'i (God bless them) said that the hand is
not to be cut on the complaint of the custodian and the usurper. On the
same disagreement are analysed the positions of the borrower (commo-
date loan), the person who has hired property, the mudãrib, the person
who borrows goods for sale, the person taking possession of goods offered
for sale, the pledgee and any person, other than the owner, who has cus-
todial possession. The hand is to be cut on the complaint of the owner for
theft from any of these persons, except that in the case of the mortgagor
it can be cut on his complaint when the property exists and he has paid
his debt, because he has no right to initiate a claim for the property with-
out this. Al-Shãfi'i (God bless him) based his view on the rule preferred
by him that these persons do not have the right to demand the return of
the property. Zufar (God bless him) says that the right to initiatelitiga-
tion for the return of property arises from custodial necessity, but it does
not arise for purposes of demanding cutting of the hand, because it leads
to the loss of financial protection.'° We maintain that theft in itself gives
rise to cutting of the hand, and it is proved before the qadi through legal
proof, which is the testimony of two witnesses following the complaint
that is considered in the absolute sense." The consideration is due to the
need of these persons for the return of the property, and along with that
the cutting of the hand is implemented as well. The purpose of the liti-
gation is the securing of his right, while the loss of financial protection is
a necessity for claiming this right, therefore, it is not taken into account.
The shubhah that may possibly be raised as an objection that is not taken
into account, for example, if the owner is present and the custodian is
absent, the cutting will be undertaken on the basis of his (owner's) liti-
gation, even though the shubhah that the custodian may have given the
thief permission to enter the hirz exists.
If a thief's hand is amputated for theft and the property has been
stolen from him, neither he nor the owner has the right to demand the
cutting of the hand of the second thief. The reason is that the wealth has
no marketable value as far as the thief is concerned so that he is not held
liable due to the loss of the property, therefore, theft in itself does not give
rise to the obligation. The first thief, however, has the authority for the
'°Because there is no compensation of property where the hand is cut.
"Not just for the financial claim.

--- Page 985 ---

Al-Hidyah(cid:9) 269
BOOK XII: THEFT(cid:9)
recovery of the property, according to one narration, because the return
of the property is obligatory for him.
If the second thief steals prior to the cutting of the hand of the first,
or after the hadd has been waived due to shubhah, his hand is to be cut
on the basis of the first complaint. The reason is that the extinction of
marketable value is a necessity of cutting of the hand, and this is not
found, therefore, he becomes like a usurper.
If a person steals something and then returns it to the owner before
the commencement of proceedings before the judge, his hand is not to be
cut. It is narrated from Abü Yftsuf (God bless him) that it is to be cut like
the situation where he returns it to the owner after the commencement of
proceedings. The reasoning underlying the authentic narration (zãhir al-
riwãyah) is that a complaint (litigation) is a condition for proving theft,
because testimony is deemed a necessity for eliminating the dispute and
the dispute stands terminated in this case. This is distinguished from the
situation where it is returned after the proceedings, where the litigation
stands terminated and its purpose has been attained (through prosecu-
tion), thus, it remains finally settled.
If a decision has been rendered against a person for cutting of the
hand in a case of theft, and the stolen property is gifted to the thief,
amputation is not carried out. The meaning is if it is delivered to him.
Likewise if the owner sells it to him. Zufar and al-Shäfi'i (God bless them)
said that his hand is to be cut. It is also one narration from Abü Yüsuf
(God bless him), because the theft stands completed both with respect to
commission and proof, and this transaction (gift or sale) has not made
obvious whether ownership passed to the thief at the time of the commis-
sion of the theft, thus, there is no shubhah here (therefore, his hand has to
be cut). We argue that execution is a consequence of the judgement in this
category (of hudüd), for it (judgement) is not sufficient without the satis-
faction of the claim through execution, because judgement is for proving
the offence, while cutting of the hand is a right of Allah, the Exalted, and
this is claimed at the time of cutting. If this is the case, the continuance of
prosecution (claim of sariqah) is stipulated up to the time of satisfaction
of this right (and this claim has been given up through the gift or sale),
thus, it is as if he made him the owner prior to the adjudication.
He said: Likewise if the value of the stolen property decreases and
becomes less than the nisãb, that is, prior to execution and after judge-
ment. It is narrated from Muhammad (God bless him) that the hand is

--- Page 986 ---

270(cid:9) Al-Hidayah(cid:9) BOOK XII: THEFT
to be cut, which is also the opinion of Zufar and al-Shafi'i (God bless
them), in the light of the deficiency in the value of the 'ayn (when partly
destroyed or lost by the thief after the theft). We maintain that as the
completion of the nisãb is a condition that must continue up to the time
of execution, due to what we have said, as distinguished from the mate-
rial loss in the thing for which he is liable to compensation, therefore, the
nisãb there is complete by way of 'ayn and dayn (actual material and that
to be compensated), even where he destroys the whole of it. As for the
loss in price, it is not liable to compensation.
If the thief claims that the thing stolen is owned by him, amputa-
tion will be waived, even if he does not come up with testimony, that is,
after the witnesses have testified to the theft. A1-Shãfi'I (God bless him)
said that it is not waived by a mere claim, because the thief is able to
do this easily and this will lead to the closing of the door to this type
of hadd. We maintain that shubhah has the effect of waiving the penalty
and this has been created by the mere claim due to its probability." What
he (al-Shãfi'i) has said is not valid, due to the validity of retraction after
confession by the thief.13
If two persons confess to the commission of theft, and then one of
them says that it is his wealth, the hands of both persons are not to be
cut, because the retraction is operative with respect to the person retract-
ing and it gives rise to a doubt in the case of the other, because the theft
was proved through the confession of both about an offence committed
through participation.
If two persons commit a theft and then one of them disappears, while
two witnesses testify to the theft committed by both, the hand of the
other thief is to be cut, according to AbU Hanifah (God bless him) in
his second opinion, and this is the opinion of the two jurists. The Imãm
used to say earlier that it is not to be cut, as the other might appear and
come up with a ground for creating shubhah. The reason for his second
opinion is that absence prevents the proof of theft against the thief absent,
therefore, he remains non-existent and one who is non-existent cannot
create a shubhah. There is no validity of the likely shubhah to be created,
as has preceded (in the earlier opinion).
"Even when he has not been able to establish a clear title.
1313ecause the purpose is to create a shubhah, and that is created through his claim
which is probably true.

--- Page 987 ---

BOOK XII: THEFT(cid:9) Al-Hidyah(cid:9) 271
If a slave who is subject to interdiction confesses to stealing ten
dirhams in coins, his hand is to be cut, while the stolen money is to be
returned to the one from whom it was stolen. This is the view according
to Abü Hanifah (God bless him). Abü Yftsuf (God bless him) said that his
hand is to be cut, but the ten dirhams belong to the master (of the slave).
Muhammad (God bless him) said that his hand is not to be cut and the
ten dirhams are for the master, which is the opinion of Zufar (God bless
him) as well. The meaning here is when the master declares that the slave
is lying. If he confesses to stealing consumable goods, his hand is to be
cut. If the slave is an authorised slave (permitted to undertake business),
his hand is to be cut in both situations. Zufar (God bless him) said that
his hand is not to be cut in all these situations. The reason is based on the
principle preferred by him that the confession of the slave against himself
is not valid in cases of hudüd and qisãs, as such a confession affects his life
and limbs and all this is the wealth of the master, and a confession against
another is not acceptable. The authorised slave, however, is held liable for
compensation and wealth due to the validity of his acknowledgement of
these as he has been granted authority by the master over these things,
while the interdicted slave's acknowledgement with respect to wealth too
is not acceptable.
We maintain that his confession is valid from the perspective of his
being a human being and thereafter it extends to value, and it is valid
from the perspective of his being wealth. Further, there is no suspicion
in such a confession insofar as it includes an injury, and such a confes-
sion is acceptable against another. Muhammad (God bless him) argues
in the case of the interdicted slave that his acknowledgement with respect
to wealth is void, therefore, an acknowledgement of misappropriation on
his part is not valid and the wealth remains that of the master, and there
is no cutting of the hand for stealing the wealth of the master. This is
supported by the fact that wealth is the primary factor in his case, while
cutting of the hand is secondary so that prosecution proceedings are valid
for it and not for cutting of the hand, and a claim of wealth is established
without it too. The opposite of this dispute cannot be heard by a court
nor is it established. Consequently, when a claim is void with respect to
the primary thing it is void with respect to the secondary as well. This is
different from the case of the authorised slave, because an acknowledge-
ment about the wealth in his possession is valid, therefore, a confession
with respect to the secondary thing is valid too.

--- Page 988 ---

272(cid:9) Al-Hidayah(cid:9) BOOK XII: THEFT
Abü YUsuf (God bless him) argues that he confessed to two things
in his confession for purposes of cutting of the hand. The first is against
himself and this is valid on the basis of what we have mentioned. The
second is with respect to wealth, and this is not valid due to the right of
the master in him. Cutting of the hand becomes due without this. It is as
if a freeman says, "The dress that is in the possession of Zayd I stole from
'Amr." Zayd then says, "It is my dress." The hand of the person confessing
will be cut even if he is not correct in identifying the dress, and the dress
is not recovered from Zayd.
According to Abü HanIfah (God bless him) the confession with
respect to the cutting of the hand is valid on his part, due to what we
elaborated, therefore, it is valid with respect to wealth too based on this.
The reason is that the confession is compatible with the state of subsis-
tence, and wealth in a state of subsistence is secondary to cutting of the
hand insofar as the protection accorded by the law to wealth is extin-
guished as a result of it, thus, the claim for cutting of the hand is satisfied
even after the destruction (consumption) of the property. This is distin-
guished from the issue about the freeman, because amputation becomes
obligatory even by stealing from a custodian, but what does not lead to
the obligation through theft by the slave is the wealth of the master. If the
master were to deem him truthful his hand would be cut in all the above
cases due to the elimination of the obstacle.
He said: If the hand of the thief is cut and the thing (stolen) still exists
in his possession, it is to be returned to the owner, due to its (continued)
existence in his ownership. If, however, it stands consumed, he is not
held liable for compensation. This generality includes consumption and
destruction, and it is a narration of Abü Yüsuf (God bless him) from Abü
Hanifah (God bless him) and it is well known. Al-Hasan narrated from
him that he is to be held liable in case of consumption. Al-Shãfi'i (God
bless him) said that he is liable for compensation in both cases, because
these are two rights with two different causes and they do not preclude
each other. Amputation is the right of the law (shar'), and its cause is
the non-avoidance of an act that the law (shar') has prohibited, while
compensation is the right of an individual and its cause is the taking of
wealth. It is as if a person consumes owned game inside the Haram or
drinks wine owned by a Dhimmi.
We rely on the saying of the Prophet (God bless him and grant him
peace), "There is no financial penalty for the thief after his right hand

--- Page 989 ---

BOOK XII: THEFT(cid:9) Al-Hidãyah(cid:9) 273
has been amputated."14 The reason is that the obligation of financial lia-
bility negates cutting of the hand, because he comes to own the property
by payment of compensation right from the time of the taking, which
makes it obvious that it falls into his ownership and that negates ampu-
tation due to shubhah, and whatever is negated by it (amputation) stands
negated (compensation). Further, the subject-matter no longer remains
protected as the right of the individual (after theft), for if it did it would be
permissible in itself and would negate cutting of the hand due to doubt,
therefore, the property becomes prohibited due to the right of Allah, like
carrion in which there is no compensation. The protection, however, is
not lost with respect to consumption, because it is an act other than
theft and there is no necessity with respect to its consumption. Likewise
shubhah is acknowledged in what is the cause and not in other things.
The reasoning for the well known view (that includes both consumption
and destruction for the absence of compensation) is that consumption
is the completion of the purpose (of theft), therefore, shubhah is consid-
ered with respect to it. Likewise the loss of protection is established with
respect to compensation because it is one of the necessities of its loss with
respect to destruction for negating similarity between theft and compen-
sation.
He said: If a person commits theft several times and is subjected
to amputation for one of them, it is considered amputation for all of
them, and he is not liable for compensating anything according to AbU
Hanifah (God bless him). The two jurists said that he makes compensa-
tion for every property except the one for which his hand is cut. The issue
pertains to the case where one of them is present to claim his right, but if
all of them are present and his hand is cut due to their prosecution he is
not liable for any compensation in any of the cases by agreement of the
jurists. The two jurists argue that the person present is not the deputy of
all those absent, and prosecution is necessary for establishing the offence
of theft. Thus, theft relevant to those absent is not established, and his
hand is not cut on account of those thefts, therefore, their stolen prop-
erties stand protected. The Imãm argues that the obligation for all these
thefts is a single amputation as the right of Allah, the Exalted, because
the hudüd are based on the rule of merger and concurrence. Prosecution
1t is gharib in these words, but a similar tradition has been recorded by al-Nasa'i in
14
his Sunan. A1-Zayla'i, vol. 3,375.

--- Page 990 ---

274(cid:9) Al-Hidãyah(cid:9)
BOOK XII: THEFT
before the qãdi is a condition for its proof, thus, when the claim is satis-
fied it is satisfied on account of all the obligations (of amputation). Do
you not see that its benefit reverts to all, therefore, it is implemented on
behalf of all? On the basis of the same disagreement is analysed the case
where all the nisabs belong to a single individual and he prosecutes him
for some. Allah, the Exalted, knows what is correct.

--- Page 991 ---

Chapter io6
Mode of Stealing Property and Related Issues
If a person steals a dress and cuts it into two inside the house and there-
after takes it out so that its value outside is ten dirhams, his hand is to be
cut. It is narrated from Abü Yüsuf (God bless him) that his hand is not
to be cut as in this there is a basis for his ownership, and that is by tearing
that is excessive. He is liable for its value and comes to own the compen-
sated property. He is now like a buyer who steals the sold commodity
where the seller has an option.'
The two jurists argue that taking is deemed a cause for compensation,
but not for ownership. Ownership is established by way of necessity for
facilitating the payment of compensation so that both counter-values do
not gather in the same ownership. Such a case does not give rise to shub-
hah by the taking itself. It is like the seller stealing a defective commodity
that he sold,' as distinguished from what is mentioned (by AbU Yüsuf),
because the contract of sale is constituted for the purpose of acquiring
ownership. The present disagreement is about the case where he (the
owner) chooses compensation of the loss and the taking of the dress, but
if he chooses the compensation of value and the leaving of the dress with
him (the thief), his hand is not to be cut by agreement, because the dress
is in his ownership extending from the time of taking. It is as if he made
a gift of the dress to him. All this applies when the loss is excessive. It the
loss is minor, his hand is to be cut by agreement, due to the absence of
the cause of ownership, for then the owner does not have the option of
making him liable for the entire value.
'Amputation is not awarded in this case.
'Where the buyer is not aware of the defect. In this case amputation is awarded.
275

--- Page 992 ---

276(cid:9) A1-Hidayah(cid:9) BOOK XII: THEFT
If he steals a goat, slaughters it, and then takes it out, his hand is not
to be cut. The reason is that the theft is committed in meat, and there is
no amputation for meat.
If a person steals gold or silver for which amputation is awarded, and
he moulds them into dirhams and dinars, his hand is to be cut, while
the dirhams and dnrs are returned to the person from whom the met-
als were stolen. This is the view according to Abü Hanifah (God bless
him). The two jurists said that there is no way for the owner (from whom
the metals were stolen) to have access to the coins. The primary offence
was usurpation, but this is craftsmanship that has marketable value in
their view, with the Imãm disagreeing. Thereafter, the implementation of
hadd is not difficult according to his view, because the thief did not come
to own the coins. It is said that according to the view of the two jurists
amputation is not obligatory, because he came to own them prior to cut-
ting of the hand. It is also said that it does become obligatory, because
by craftsmanship it became something else, therefore, he did not come to
own the substance of the stolen metals.
If he steals a dress and dyes it red, his hand is to be cut and the dress
is not to be taken from him, yet he does not compensate the value of
the dress. This is the position according to AbU Hanifah and AbU YUsuf
(God bless them). Muhammad (God bless them) said that the dress is to
be taken from him and the addition made through dyeing is to be paid to
him, on the analogy of usurpation (ghasb). The argument that combines
the two (the basis of analogy and its extension) is that the primary thing
is the existence of the dress and the existence of the dyeing is a secondary
thing. The two jurists argue that the dyeing is in existence in both forms
(appearance of red colour) and meaning (value) so that if he (the owner)
decides to take it in dyed form he compensates the addition due to dyeing.
The right of the owner subsists in the dress in form (insofar as he has the
right to recover the dress) but not in meaning (value), because the thief
is not liable for compensation if it is destroyed, therefore, we inclined
towards the situation of the thief. This is distinguished from the case of
the usurper, because the right of each one of them continues in both form
and meaning, thus, they are equal from this perspective. We preferred
the perspective of the owner in what we have said (above about the dress
being primary and the dyeing secondary).
If he dyes it black, it is taken from him according to both sides
(all three jurists), that is, according to AbU IIanIfah, Abü YUsuf and

--- Page 993 ---

BooK XII: THEFT(cid:9) Al-Hidãyah(cid:9) 277
Muhammad (God bless them). According to Abü YUsuf (God bless him),
this case and the previous one are the same, because the black colour is
an addition in his view just like the red colour. According to Muhammad
(God bless him), it is an excess like the red, but it does not sever the
right of the owner. According to AbU Hanifah (God bless him), the black
colour is a decrease in value, therefore, it does not sever the right of the
owner to recover. Allah knows best.

--- Page 994 ---

278(cid:9) Al-Hidäyah(cid:9) BOOK XII: THEFT

--- Page 995 ---

Chapter
107
Highway Robbery (Qat' al-Tariq)
He said: If an armed group (having the force to resist), or a single armed
person able to employ force, come out with the intention of cutting off
the highway are apprehended before they have the opportunity to seize
wealth or to kill someone, the imam is to imprison them till they repent.
If they seize wealth belonging to a Muslim or a Dhimmi, and the wealth
so seized when divided among their group comes to ten dirhams or more
per person or what reaches such value, the imam is to cut their hands
and feet from the opposite sides. If they kill someone without seizing
wealth, the imam is to execute them by way of hadd. The basis for this are
the words of the Exalted, "The punishment of those who wage war against
Allah and His Messenger, and strive with might and main for mischief
through the land is: execution, or crucifixion, or the cutting off of hands
and feet from opposite sides, or exile from the land: that is their disgrace
in this world, and a heavy punishment is theirs in the Hereafter."
The meaning, Allah knows best, is the distribution of the punish-
ments mentioned (in the text) over situations (offences),' and these are
four: three are mentioned' and we shall be mentioning the fourth, God,
the Exalted, willing. The reason is that offences change with circum-
stances, and the punishment is to suit the gravity of the offence.
As for the meaning of imprisonment, it is because of what is meant
by the exile mentioned in the text, because it is exile from the face of the
'Qur'än 5 :33.
'This is meant to negate the opinion held by Imãm Malik (God bless him) that the
imam has a right to choose the punishment he likes.
The first is attempt; the second is seizing wealth; and the third is killing without
3
taking wealth.
279

--- Page 996 ---

280(cid:9) Al-Hidãyah(cid:9) BOOK XII: THEFT
earth to prevent them from doing evil to its inhabitants. They are also to
be subjected to ta'zir for undertaking the act of terrorising people. The
ability to use force has been stipulated, because the act of muhãrabah is
not realised without force. The second situation (offence) that we have
explained is due to the text that we have recited. The stipulation for the
wealth taken, that it be the wealth of a Muslim or Dhimmi was due to
the reason that its protection be perpetual. Consequently, if they cut off
the way of the musta'min (enemy visiting on safe-conduct), cutting of the
limbs is not obligatory. The completion of the nisãb is stipulated with
respect to each one of them so that his limbs do not become liable to
cutting without having acquired what is substantial. The meaning of cut-
ting is the cutting of the right hand and the left foot so that the benefit of
moving around is not completely lost. The third situation (offence) that
we have described is due to what we have recited.
They are to be executed by way of hadd so that if the heirs were to
forgive them, their forgiveness would not be permitted, because it is the
right of the law (shar') And the fourth is where they kill and seize wealth,
then the imam has the option of cutting off their hands and legs from
the opposite sides or to executing them and crucifying them, or of exe-
cuting them (only), or of crucifying them. Muhammad (God bless him)
said that he is to execute them or crucify them, but not to cut off their
limbs. The reason is that it is a single offence, therefore, two hadds are not
obligatory, because an offence less than homicide is included in homi-
cide with respect to the hadd, like the hadd of theft and stoning. The two
Jurists maintain that this is a single penalty that has been enhanced due
to the gravity of its cause, which is the total destruction of peace through
killing and snatching of wealth. It is for this reason that the cutting of the
hand and the foot together is a single hadd in the major (kubrã) form of
theft, even though they amount to two hadds in the minor form. Concur-
rence/merger is operative in several hudüd and not within a single hadd.
Thereafter, he mentioned in the Book a choice between crucifixion
and its relinquishment, and this is the authentic statement (zãhir a!-
riwãyah). It is narrated from Abü Yüsuf (God bless him) that it is not
to be given up for it is stated in the text (Qur'an), and the purpose is to
publicise it so that others learn a lesson from it. We say: the primary form
of publicising is through execution, while the extreme form is crucifixion,
therefore, a choice has been given with respect to it.

--- Page 997 ---

BOOK XII: THEFT(cid:9) Al-Hidãyah(cid:9) 281
He then said: He is to be crucified while alive and his body is to be
notched with a spear until he is dead. A similar view has been narrated
from al-Karkhi (God bless him). It is narrated from al-Tahãwi that he is
to be killed and then crucified in order to avoid mutilation. The reasoning
underlying the first view, which is correct, is that the crucifixion in this
form is more effective with respect to deterrence and that is its purpose.
He said: He is not to be crucified for more than three days, because
he will start decomposing after that and it will be offensive for the people.
It is narrated from Abü Yüsuf (God bless him) that he is to be left on the
wooden planks till he breaks down into pieces and falls so that others are
overawed by it. We say that such a lesson is learnt from what we have said
and such extreme measures are not required.
He said: If the highwayman is executed then he is not liable to com-
pensate the wealth that he took, on the analogy of the minor form of
theft, and we have elaborated that.
If one of them undertook the killing, the hadd is to be imposed on
all of them together, because it is the consequence of muhãrabah. The
offence is realised because some of them are supporting others, and they
fall back on their supporters when they retreat. The condition is killing
on the part of one of them and this stands fulfilled.
He said: Killing with a stick, or with a stone or with a sword is all the
same for this purpose, because it has occurred by cutting off the highway
and the waylaying of the travellers.
If the highway robber does not kill nor takes wealth, but wounds
someone, he is to be subjected to qisas for injuries in which qisãs is appli-
cable, while arsh (compensation) is to be taken in injuries liable to arsh,
and this is to be done by the heirs. The reason is that there is no hadd for
these offences, therefore, the right of the individual is established, which
is what we have mentioned, and this is claimed by the wall.
If he seizes wealth and then wounds someone, his hand and foot
are to be cut, and the claims for wounds are annulled. The reason is
that when hadd is imposed as the right of Allah, the protection of life
as the right of the individual is annulled, just as the protection of wealth
is annulled.
If he seizes wealth after having repented and commits intentional
homicide (murder), then the awliya' have the option to kill him by way
of retaliation or to forgive him. The reason is that hadd is not applicable
in this offence after repentance, due to the exemption mentioned in the

--- Page 998 ---

282(cid:9) A1-Hidäyah(cid:9) BOOK XII: THEFT
text (Qur'an). The reason is that repentance depends upon the return of
wealth, and there is no cutting in such a case, therefore, the right of the
individual is established for life and wealth, so that the wall can claim
qisãs or forgive him. Compensation is imposed if the wealth is destroyed
in his possession or he consumes it.
If there is among the highway robbers a minor or an insane person
or a relative of the prohibited degree among the waylaid persons, the
hadd is waived with respect to the rest. The statement about the minor
and the insane is the opinion of AbU Hanifah and Muhammad (God bless
them). It is narrated from Abü Yüsuf (God bless him) that if the offence
is undertaken by sane persons, the rest (other than the insane) are sub-
jected to hadd. The minor form of theft is governed by this rule as well.
He argues that the direct actor is the primary actor, while the supporters
are secondary. There is no shortcoming in the direct action of the sane,
while the shortcoming in the secondary is not taken into account. In the
opposite form the meaning as well as the hukm are reversed as well. The
two jurists argue that it is a single offence undertaken by all. If the act of
some does not raise a liability, the act of the others will be reduced to a
partial cause ( 'illah) , and the hukm is not established by it. It will be like a
person committing a mistake participating with one undertaking the act
intentionally.
As for the relatives of the prohibited degree, it is said in its interpreta-
tion that this is the case where wealth is jointly held by the offender and
the victim. The correct view, however, is that it is unqualified, because
it is a single offence, as we have mentioned, and the use of force against
some gives rise to the use of force against the rest. This is distinguished
from the case where there is among the victims an enemy on safe-conduct
(musta'min), because the use of force with respect to him is due to the
shortcoming in protection, but this is specific to him. As regards the case
here, it is due to the shortcoming in the hirz, and a caravan is a single hirz.
When the hadd is waived, the claim of qias for murder is transferred
to the awliyaa', due to the emergence of the right of the individual as we
mentioned. If they like they can claim execution by way of retaliation or
if they like they can forgive them.
If some travellers in the caravan waylay the rest, hadd does not
become obligatory. The reason is that the hirz is one, therefore, the entire
caravan is like a single house.

--- Page 999 ---

BOOK XII: THEFT(cid:9) Al-Hidäyah(cid:9) 283
Where a person cuts off the road, during the day or night, in a city,
or between Kufah and Hirah, then he is not a qati' al-tariq (highway
robber) on the basis of istihsãn. On the basis of analogy, he would be
considered a highway robber, which is the opinion of al-Shãfi'i (God bless
him), due to its occurrence in reality. It is related from Abü Yüsuf (God
bless him) that hadd becomes obligatory if the offence is committed out-
side the city, even if he is very close to it, because help cannot reach due
to the calls of the victim. It is also narrated from him that if they take
up the offensive during the day with weapons or during the night with
weapons or with sticks, then they are highway robbers, because use of
weapons is swift and at night help is slow in coming. We say: qat' al-tariq
takes place by the cutting off of the highway for the travellers, and this is
not realised within a city or very close to it, because rescue is available in
these locations. The reason is that they are taken to task for the return of
wealth for securing the right of the person entitled, and they are punished
and imprisoned for their offence (inside the city). If they commit murder
then the matter is transferred to the awliyã', as we have explained.
If a person strangles another thereby killing him, then the diyah is to
be paid by the 'aqilah, according to Abü Ilanifah (God bless him). This
pertains to the issue of killing with a blunt weapon and we shall elaborate
it in the chapter on Diyat, God, the Exalted, willing. If he kills more than
once by strangulation inside the city, he is to be executed, because he has
become one who is spreading terror in the land, therefore, his evil is to be
eliminated through execution. Allah, the Exalted, knows best.

--- Page 1000 ---

284(cid:9) Al-Hidãyah(cid:9) BOOK XII: THEFT

--- Page 1001 ---

Al- Hidãyah
BOOK THIRTEEN
Siyar (Relations With
Non-Muslims)
(cid:9)
Ch. 108: The Legal Status of jihad 287
(cid:9)
Ch. 1o9: The Rules of Warfare 291
Ch. 110: Negotiating Cessation of Hostilities and Safe Conduct 295
Sec. 1: Safe Conduct (cid:9) 297
Ch. in: Spoils of War and Their Division(cid:9) 301
Sec. 1: Modes of Division(cid:9) 309
Sec. : Rewards(cid:9) 313
Ch. n: Conquests by the Unbelievers(cid:9) 317
Ch. n: Entering Enemy Territory on Amãn(cid:9) 323
Sec. 1: Granting Entry to the Enemy(cid:9) 323
(cid:9)
Ch. 114: 'Ushr and Kharãj 329
Ch. 115: Jizyah (Poll Tax)(cid:9) 335
Sec. 1: Rights and Duties of the Dhimmis(cid:9) 339
Sec. : Christians of Banü Taghlib(cid:9) 341
(cid:9)
Ch. 116: Rebels (Bughat) 343

--- Page 1002 ---

286(cid:9) Al-Hidayah(cid:9) BOOK XIII: SIYAR

--- Page 1003 ---

Chapter
108
The Legal Status of Jihad
The word siyar is the plural of sirah, and it is the strategy adopted for
managing affairs. In the shari'ah it is applied specifically to the strategy
adopted by the Prophet (God bless him and grant him peace) in his mil-
itary expeditions.
He said: jihad is a communal obligation. If a group from among the
people undertakes it, the obligation is removed from the rest. As for its
obligation, the basis is found in the words of the Exalted, "And fight the
Pagans all together as they fight you all together. But know that Allah is
with those who restrain themselves,"' and in the words of the Prophet
(God bless him and grant him peace), "jihad is determined till the Day
of Judgement."' He (God bless him and grant him peace) meant thereby
a definitive obligation (fard) that will always remain. The reason is that it
has not been made a definitive obligation for itself, as in itself it is disrup-
tive.' It has been made a definitive obligation for strengthening the Din
of Allah and for driving away evil from His servants. When the purpose
is achieved through some, the obligation is removed with respect to the
others, like the funeral prayer or returning the salutation.
If no one undertakes it, all the people commit sin by neglecting it,
because the obligation is placed upon all, and the occupation of all with
'Qur'an 9: 36
1t is recorded by AbU DawUd in his Sunan. Al-Zayla'i, vol. 3, 377. A question is raised
2
in al-'Inayah as to how an obligation has been derived from a khabar wãhid. He replies
that if a khabar wãhid is supported by a definitive evidence, obligation may be attributed
to it.
'By bringing desolation to the lands and annihilation of humans. Al- 'Inayah.
287

--- Page 1004 ---

288(cid:9) Al-Hidãyah(cid:9) B00KXIII:SIYAR
it would cut off the material for jihad like horses and weapons, therefore,
it is made obligatory as a communal obligation.
Unless the call to arms is general, in which case it becomes a univer-
sal obligation, due to the words of the Exalted, "Go ye forth, (whether
equipped) lightly or heavily, and strive and struggle, with your goods
and your persons, in the Cause of Allah. That is best for you, if ye (but)
"4
knew, It is stated in al-Jami' al-Saghir: Jihad is obligatory, except that
the Muslims have an option until there is need for them. The first part
of this statement indicates a communal obligation, while the latter part
indicates a general call to arms. The reason for the general call to arms is
that the purpose is not being attained without it, except by the participa-
tion of all, therefore, it is made a definitive obligation for all.
Jihad is not an obligation for the minor, because minority is an object
of compassion, nor is it an obligation for the slave or the woman, due to
the precedence accorded to the right of the master and the husband.
It is also not an obligation for the blind, or the invalid, or one whose
limbs are amputated. If, however, the enemy attack a land it becomes
obligatory upon all the people to defend it. For doing so the woman goes
out without the permission of her husband and the slave without the
permission of his master, because it has now become afard 'ayn (univer-
sal obligation), and lawful ownership and the enslavement of marriage do
not stand in front of the universal obligations, as is the case with prayer
and fasting. This is distinguished from the situation that is prior to the
making of the general call, as before it they are self-sufficient without
these two categories, thus, there is no need to annul the right of the mas-
ter and the husband.
There is no need to impose a cess (on the people to support the army)
as long as there is revenue (fay') available. The reason is that it does not
resemble wages, and there is no necessity for it, because the wealth in the
treasury is intended for the representatives of the Muslims.
He said: If there is nothing available, then there is no harm if some
of them strengthen others. The reason is that in this there is repelling
of a higher injury by accepting a lower level injury. This is supported
by the fact that the Prophet (God bless him and grant him peace) took
some coats of mail from Safwãn (God be pleased with him)' and 'Umar
4Qur'5n 9: 41
51t is recorded by Abü Däwud in the section on sales. Al-Zayla'i, vol. 3, 377.

--- Page 1005 ---

BOOK XIII: SIYAR(cid:9) Al-Hidayah(cid:9) 289
(God be pleased with him) used to send to battle bachelors on behalf of
married men, and he used to give the horse of the person who could not
participate in battle to one moving on foot (towards the enemy).'
61t is recorded by Ibn Abi Shaybah. A1-Zayla'i, vol. 3, 377.

--- Page 1006 ---

290(cid:9) Al-Hidyah(cid:9) BOOK XIII: SIYAR

--- Page 1007 ---

Chapter
109
The Rules of Warfare
When the Muslims commence battle, and they have surrounded a city
or a fort, they are to invite the inhabitants to accept Islam, due to what
is related by Ibn 'Abbas (God bless them both) "that the Prophet (God
bless him and grant him peace) did not commence combat with a people
without first inviting them to Islam."
He said: If they respond positively, they are to refrain from fighting
them, due to the attainment of the purpose.
If they refuse, they are to invite them to the payment of jizyah, and
this is what the Prophet (God bless him and grant him peace) ordered
the commanders of the armies to do' for it is one of the consequences
upon the conclusion of battle, according to what the text has stated. This
applies to those among them who are eligible to accept the payment of
jizyah. Those from whom jizyah is not acceptable like the apostates or the
idol worshippers from among the Arabs, there is no benefit in inviting
them to accept jizyah, because only Islam is acceptable from them. Allah,
the Exalted, has said, "Then shall ye fight, or they shall submit."3
If they commence payment (badhalü), then they have the same
rights as the Musims, and they have the same liabilities like those of
the Muslims, due to the saying of 'All (God be pleased with him), "They
have paid the jizyah so that their blood (is protected) like our blood, and
their wealth (is protected) like our wealth."4 The meaning of badhi here
'It is recorded by 'Abd al-Razzaq from Sufyãn al-Thawri. A1-Zayla'i, vol. 3, 378.
'It is recorded by all the sound compilations, except al-Bukhari. Al-Zayla'i, vol. 3,
380.
3Qur'an 48: 16
41t is gharib, and is recorded by al-Dar'qutni in his Sunan. Al-Zayla'i, vol. 3, 381.
291

--- Page 1008 ---

292(cid:9) Al-Hidãyah(cid:9) BOOK XIII: SIYAR
is acceptance, likewise the meaning of the term i'tã' that is mentioned in
the Qur'an. Allah knows best.
It is not permitted to engage in battle those whom the invitation to
accept Islam has not reached without first inviting them. This is based
on the saying of the Prophet (God bless him and grant him peace) when
he gave advice to the commanders of the detachments, "Invite them then
to witness that there is no god, but God."5 The reason is that through the
invitation they come to know that we engage them in battle on account
of our Din and not for purloining their wealth and enslavement of their
families. Perhaps, they will respond positively so that the burden of battle
is avoided. If the commander engages them in battle before communi-
cating the invitation, he commits a sin. Nevertheless, there is no financial
penalty due to the absence of there being protection, which arises from
Din or their being in the dãr al-Islam. Thus, it becomes like the killing of
women and children.
It is recommended that even those whom the invitation has reached
already, be invited, so that there is an enhanced warning for them. This is
not obligatory, however, as there is an authentic report "that the Prophet
(God bless him and grant him peace) carried out a raid against Banü al-
Mustaliq and caught them unawares. He also took an undertaking from
Usãmah (God be pleased with him) that he will raid Ubna in the early
hours of the morning and then set it on fire."' A raid is not undertaken
with an invitation.
If they reject the invitation, they are to seek the help of Allah and
engage them in combat, due to the saying of the Prophet (God bless him
and grant him peace) in the tradition of Sulayman ibn Buraydah, "If they
reject this then invite them to accept the jizyah," till he said, "if they refuse
that, then seek the help of Allah against them and engage them in com-
bat."7 The reason is that it is Allah, the Exalted, who helps His friends and
destroys His enemies, thus, His help is to be sought in all affairs.
There is no harm in taking women and copies of the Qur'an along
with the Muslim soldiers if they are a huge army who can can be relied
upon for their security, because the usual in such a case is safety, and the
usual is treated like something that stands realised.
'This has preceded earlier. A1-Zayla'i, vol. 3, 381.
61t is recorded by al-Bukhari and Muslim. Al-Zayla'i, vol. 3, 381.
7This tradition has preceded. A1-Zayla'i, vol. 3, 382.

--- Page 1009 ---

BOOK XIII: SIYAR(cid:9) Al-Hidyah(cid:9) 293
It is considered disapproved to take them along with a detachment
who cannot be relied upon for their security, for this amounts to expos-
ing them to loss and dishonour, while the exposure of the mushaf can
cause its desecration for they will desecrate it due to their hate for the
Muslims. This is a sound interpretation due to the words of the Prophet
(God bless him and grant him peace), "Do not travel with the Qur'an
to the land of the enemy."' If, however, a Muslim crosses over to their
land on an undertaking of safety (amãn), there is no harm if he carries
the mushaf with him, if they are a people who abide by their treaty, as
apparently it will not be exposed to desecration. It is old women who go
out with a huge army to undertake duties that are suitable for them, like
cooking, giving water and nursing. As for the younger women they are to
stay in their houses so as to avoid problems.
A woman is not to participate in battle without the permission of her
husband nor a slave without the permission of the master, as we elabo-
rated, unless there is a necessity due to an attack by the enemy upon
the land. It is imperative for the Muslims not to become rebellious or to
purloin the spoils or to mutilate bodies. This is based upon the saying
of the Prophet (God bless him and grant him peace), "Do not purloin
(the spoils), do not become rebellious and do not mutilate (bodies)?'9
Ghulül is theft from the spoils, while ghadr is going back on the com-
pact of loyalty and breaking it. The muthlah related in the tradition of the
'Uraniyyin1 is abrogated by a later prohibition and that has been trans-
°
mitted.
A woman, minor, enfeebled old man, an invalid, and a blind man are
not to be killed. The reason is that permitted killing is of those persons
who are capable of hostility, and this is not realised in the case of these
persons. It is for this reason that they are not to kill a paralysed person,
one whose right hand has been amputated, and one whose hand and leg
of the opposite sides are cut. Al-Shãfi'i (God bless him) goes against our
opinion in the case of the enfeebled old man, the invalid, and the blind.
The reason is that permitted killing in his view is based upon unbelief,
but the evidence against him is what we have elaborated. There is an
authentic tradition that the Prophet (God bless him and grant him peace)
8ft is recorded by all the sound compilations, except al-Tirmidhi. Al-Zayala'i, vol. 3,
383.
91t has preceded in an earlier tradition. Al-Zayla'i, vol. 3, 385.
"It is recorded by al-Bukhari. Al-Zayla'i, vol. 3, 385.

--- Page 1010 ---

294(cid:9) Al-Hidãyah(cid:9) BOOK XIII: SIYAR
forbade the killing of minors and females." When the Messenger of Allah
(God bless him and grant him peace) saw a slain woman, he said, "This
woman: she was not one who would engage in combat, so why was she
killed?1 112
He said: Unless one of these persons have an advisory capacity in war
or the woman is a ruler, due to the consequences of her injurious action
towards the servants of AllIãh. Likewise any of these people who actually
participates in battle for repelling their evil, because actual fighting per-
mits this.
The insane person is not to be killed. The reason is that he is not
addressed by the divine communication (creating liability), unless he is
actually fighting in which case he is to be killed in order to avoid his evil.
It is considered disapproved that a man advance upon his father, who
is among the polytheists, in order to kill him, due to the words of the
Exalted, "Yet bear them company in this life with justice (and consid-
eration), and follow the way of those who turn to Me?13 The reason is
that it is obligatory upon him to spend on him for his survival, therefore,
permission to kill him will negate this.
"It is gharib in these words, but the same meaning is found in traditions recorded by
all the sound compilations, except Ibn Mãjah. Al-Zayla'i, vol. 3, 386.
'21t is recorded by AbU DäwUd and al-Nasä'i. AI-Zayla'i, vol. 3, 387.
13 Qur'5n 31: 15

--- Page 1011 ---

Chapter iio
Negotiating Cessation of Hostilities and Safe
Conduct
If the imam deems it proper to negotiate the cessation of hostilities with
the residents of the dar al-harb or with one group among them, and in
this there is the securing of the interest of the Muslims, then there is no
harm in it, due to the words of the Exalted, "But if the enemy incline
towards peace, do thou (also) incline towards peace, and trust in Allah."'
The Messenger of Allah (God bless him and grant him peace) negotiated
a cessation of hostilities with the residents of Makkah in the year of al-
Hudaybiyyah on the terms that the war between them and him will cease
for ten years.' The reason is that a negotiated settlement is jihad in mean-
ing if it is in the interests of the Muslims, because the purpose is to repel
the evil that will result from continued hostilities. It is not necessary to
limit the duration of the settlement to what is narrated (ten years) due
to the extension of the purpose in excess of that, as distinguished from
the case where it is not in the interest of the Muslims, because that would
amount to giving up jihad in both form and meaning.
If they commit a breach of the truce, he is to engage them in com-
bat and is not to communicate the repudiation to them, if the breach is
committed by them in agreement, because they have all broken the treaty,
therefore, there is no need to terminate it. This is distinguished from the
case where some of them enter our territory and commit highway rob-
bery (qat' al-tariq) where there is no one to restrain them, as this will not
amount to a termination of the treaty. If there is some resistance to them
'Qur'an 8: 61
2 1t is recorded by Abu DãwUd in his Sunan. A1-Zayla'i, vol. 3, 388.
295

--- Page 1012 ---

296(cid:9) Al-Hidyah(cid:9) BOOK XIII: SIYAR
and they openly fight with the Muslims, it will amount to a termination
of the treaty on the part of these particular people, but not all of them.
The reason is that it is without the permission of their king (ruler), thus,
it does not bind the rest of them. If it was by permission of their ruler, it
would amount to termination as it was with their agreement in meaning.
If the imam decides to conclude a truce with the enemy and he takes
wealth from them for doing so, there is no harm in this. The reason is
that when a settlement is permitted without wealth, it is permitted with
wealth as well. This, however, is permitted when the Muslims are in a
state of need. If there is no such need it is not permitted, as we have
explained earlier. The amount so taken will be utilised on the avenues on
which jizyah is spent. This is the case when the Muslim armies have not
descended into their plains, rather they have sent an emissary, for then it
is in the meaning of jizyah. If, however, the army lays siege to them and
takes wealth from them, it will be deemed spoils and from which a fifth
will be taken and the rest will be divided among them, because it has been
derived through the use of force in reality.
As for the apostates, the imãm is to conclude a truce with them till he
has examined their affairs. The reason is that coming back into the fold of
Islam is desired from them, therefore, it is permitted to delay combat with
them with a view to their coming back to Islam. He is not to take wealth
for doing so, because it is not permitted to take jizyah from them, due
what has been explained. If he does take it, however, he is not to return
it, because it is (legally) unprotected wealth. If the enemy lay siege to the
Muslims and demand a truce in lieu of wealth that the imam should pay
them, then the imam is not to do so insofar as it amounts to degradation
and the association of humiliation with the community of Islam. The
exception is where he sees destruction in this, because repelling death is
obligatory through all means possible.
They are not to sell weapons to the Ahl al-Harb nor to sell other
assets to them, because the Prophet (God bless him and grant him peace)
forbade the sale of weapons to the residents of the dãr al-harb or to
carry them over to them (by way of trade).3 The reason is that in this
is the strengthening of their ability to wage war against the Muslims.
Consequently, they are forbidden to do so. Likewise horses, due to the
explanation we have given. So also the transportation of iron ore for that
31t is gha rib in these words. It is recorded by al-Bayhaqi. A1-Zayla'i, vol. 3, 391.

--- Page 1013 ---

BOOK XIII: SIYAR(cid:9) Al-Hidãyah(cid:9) 297
is the basis of weapons. The same restriction is to be observed after truce
for that truce is likely to be terminated or will end and they will wage
war on us. The analogy based on this applies to food and dresses as well,
except that we have understood through the text that the Prophet (God
bless him and grant him peace) ordered Thumamah to send supplies to
the people of Makkah, who were at war with him.4
110.1 SAFE CONDUCT
If a freeman, or a freewoman, grants amtin (assurance of safety) to an
unbeliever, or to a group, or to the residents of a fort, or the residents
of a city, such assurance is valid, and none among the Muslims is per-
mitted to engage them in combat. The basis for this is the saying of the
Prophet (God bless him and grant him peace), "The blood of all Muslims
is equal (with respect to qisas) and the least among them may strive to
extend their assurance of safety,"' that is, the minimum number among
them, which is one.' The reason is that (being a freeman) he is eligible
to participate in battle, and for this reason they may be apprehensive of
him for he possesses the ability to restrain them, therefore, the granting
of an assurance of safety is realised on his part, due to its linkage with the
subject-matter of the assurance (that is, their apprehension) and there-
after extending to others besides him.7 The reason is that its cause is not
divisible and that is irnãn (faith, affirmation). Likewise amãn is not divis-
ible and is completed like the authority to give in marriage.'
He said: Unless there is an injury resulting from this in which case
it is to be repudiated (and communicated to them). It is like the imãm
granting the amãn himself, but then he comes to the conclusion that the
securing of interests demands that it be repudiated, and we have elabo-
rated that already. If the imam lays siege to a fort and one among the army
41t is recorded by al-Bayhaqi in Dala'il al-Nubuwwah. A1-Zayla'i, vol. 3, 391.
51t is recorded in the two Sahihs. Al-Zayla'i, vol. 3, 393-94.
'He says this to counter the interpretation that the least among them is the slave and
even he can grant amãn.
'Just like the sighting of the moon of Ramadan is seen by one and then applies to
the rest.
'Where there are several awliyã' with equal authority and one of them has given the
woman away in marriage.

--- Page 1014 ---

298(cid:9) Al-Hidãyah(cid:9) BOOK XIII: SIYAR
grants them amãn, but the imam perceives an injury in this and termi-
nates the assurance, as we have explained, then he is to discipline him for
acting against his opinion. This is distinguished from the case where the
granting of such assurance is a matter of interpretation, because the ben-
efit is sometimes lost due to delay (in seeking the opinion of the imam),
therefore, he is to be excused.
The amãn granted by a slave under interdiction is not valid accord-
ing to AbU Hanifah (God bless him), unless his master has permitted
him to participate in battle. Muhammad (God bless him) said that it is
valid. It is also the opinion of al-Shafi'i (God bless him). Abü Yüsuf (God
bless him) sides with Muhammad (God bless him) in one narration and
with Abü Hanifah (God bless him) in another narration. Muhammad
(God bless him) relies on the saying of the Prophet (God bless him and
grant him peace), "The amãn of a slave is amãn,"9 which was related by
Abu Müsã al-Ash'ari (God be pleased with him). The reason is that he
is a mu'min (believer) with the power to restrain, therefore, his amãn
is valid on the analogy of the slave authorised to participate in battle
as well as on the analogy of permanent amãn (for making an enemy a
Dhimmi). The stipulation of having imãn (faith) is that it is a precon-
dition for 'ibãdah (worship) and jihad is worship. The stipulation of the
power to restrain is for the realisation of fear through it, while its effect
is the dignity of religion and the securing of interests of the community
of Muslims, when the assurance is given in such a situation. He does not
possess the right to participate in battle (of his own authority), because
in this there is the suspension of the benefits accruing to the master, but
there is no such suspension through a mere statement. According to AbU
Hanifah (God bless him) he is placed under interdiction from participat-
ing in battle, therefore, his amãn is not valid, because they do not hold
him in awe. Consequently, the amãn is not linked to its subject-matter, as
distinguished from the slave authorised to participate in battle, because
awe is realised in his case. Further, he does not possess the right to par-
ticipate in battle insofar as it is a transaction that affects the right of the
master in a manner that is not devoid of an injury resulting to his inter-
ests.
Amãn is a type of combat and it consists of what we have mentioned.
The reason is that the slave sometimes makes an error (in assessing the
91t is gha rib. It is recorded by 'Abd al-Razzaq. A1-Zayla'i, vol. 3, 396.

--- Page 1015 ---

BOOK XIII: SIYAR(cid:9) Al-Hidayah(cid:9) 299
need for amãn) and that is obvious (for he is not trained for warfare). In
it is also the blocking of the means to the attainment of spoils. This is dis-
tinguished from the case of the authorised slave, because the master has
agreed to his participation, and error is rare due to his direct participation
in combat (and experience). It is also distinguished from the perpetual
amãn, which is the suspension of warfare required by Islam, thus, it has
the status of an invitation extended to him (which is a benefit), and also
in return for jizyah (which is a benefit). Finally, it is obligatory on the
imam to respond to their request (for the contract of dhimmah) and the
suspension of the obligation is a benefit, therefore, they are distinguished.
If a minor, who does not possess discretion, grants amãn his position
is like that of the insane person. If he does possess discretion, his position
is like the slave not authorised to participate in battle, along with the
disagreement in it.'° If, however, he is permitted to participate in battle,
then the correct view is that it is valid. Allah knows what is correct.
"With AbU I-Ianifah (God bless him) saying that his amãn is not valid and Muham-
mad (God bless him) saying that it is.

--- Page 1016 ---

300(cid:9) Al-Hidayah(cid:9) BOOK XIII: SIYAR

--- Page 1017 ---

Chapter ill
Spoils of War and Their Division
When the imam conquers a land 'anwatan, that is by the use of force
(mobilisation of the army), then he has a choice. If he likes he may divide
it (the land) among the (combating) Muslims, as did the Prophet (God
bless him and grant him peace) with the lands of Khaybar,1 and if he likes
he may leave the residents settled on it by imposing jizyah on them and
kharaj on their lands. This is what 'Umar (God be pleased with him) did
with the Sawad lands of Iraq with the agreement of the Companions (God
be pleased with them), while those who opposed it were not praised. In
each of these there is a model, therefore, he is to make a choice. It is said
that the first is to be adopted when the combatants are in need, and the
second when there is no such need, so that it yields its benefits for those
who come next. This is the position in the case of immovable property.
As for the purely movable property, it is not permitted to make a grant
by returning it to them (the residents), because the law (shar') has not
required this.
In the case of immovable property, there is a disagreement with a!-
Shãfi'i (God bless him), because in making a grant (for the residents)
there is the annulment of the right or ownership of the combatants enti-
tled to the spoils, therefore, it is not permitted without a counter-value
that is equivalent to it. Kharaj is not equivalent due to its paucity. This is
distinguished from ownership of slaves as the imam has the right to exe-
cute them and annul their right altogether. The evidence against him is
what we have narrated. The reason is that this is subject to examination,
for they are like agriculturists for the Muslims in general and proficient in
the various ways of cultivation, while the financial burden of cultivation
'It is recorded by al-Bukhãri in his Sahih. A1-Zayla'i, vol. 3, 397.
301

--- Page 1018 ---

302(cid:9) Al-Hidiiyah(cid:9) BOOK XIII: SIYAR
is removed (from the liability of the imam and the Muslims) along with
the fact that it will benefit those who come later. Kharãj, even though it
is meagre at the moment, will amount to an immense return over time.
If the slaves and land are granted to them, the movable property is also
to be given to them to an extent that will enable them to undertake work,
and also for the reason that the act will move out of the disapproved cat-
egory.2
He is not to accept ransom for the captives, according to AbU
Hanifah (God bless him). The two jurists said he may accept ransom
for them in the form of an exchange for Muslim prisoners, which is also
the view held by al-Shãfi'i (God bless him). The reason is that in this there
is release of the Muslim, which is better than the execution of an unbe-
liever or making use of him. The Imãm (God bless him) argues that in
this there is support for the unbelievers for he will return as a warring
enemy against us. The repelling of his mischief hostility is better than the
release of Muslim captives, because if they were to stay in their captiv-
ity would be a trial for them but would not be associated with us, while
support by sending their captives to them will have direct repercussions
on us. As for ransom by accepting wealth from them in return, it is not
permitted according to the authentic view of our school, as we have elab-
orated. In al-Siyar al-Kabir it is stated that there is no harm in doing so
if the Muslims are in dire need of funds, and this on the analogy of the
captives of Badr.3 If the captive converts to Islam in our captivity, he is
not to be exchanged for a Muslim who is in their captivity, because there
is no benefit in doing so, unless he volunteers to go and when there is
satisfaction with respect to his acceptance of Islam.
He said: It is not permitted to release them as a favour, that is, to the
captives. Al-Shãfi'i (God bless him) disagrees and says that the Prophet
(God bless him and grant him peace) released one of the prisoners of the
Battle of Badr as a favour.4 We rely upon the words of the Exalted, "Then
fight and slay the Pagans wherever ye find them."' The reason is that by
captivity and subjugation the right to enslave is established against them,
'That is if their slaves and lands are given to them, but the rest of their wealth and
families are taken away this would be a disapproved act, although the imam would be
acting within his authority in doing so.
31t is recorded by Muslim. Al-Zayla'i, vol. 3, 402.
41t is recorded by al-Bukhari as a tradition from Nafi'. Al-Zayla'i, vol. 3, 404.
'Qur'an 9: 5

--- Page 1019 ---

BOOK XIII: SIYAR(cid:9) Al-Hid.yah(cid:9) 303
therefore, it is not permitted to extinguish this right without obtaining a
benefit and compensation. What he has narrated is abrogated by what we
have recited.
If the imam decides to return and with him are cattle that he cannot
move to the dar al-Islam, he is to slaughter them and burn them, but he
is not to hamstring them or set them loose. Al-Shafi'i (God bless him)
said that he is to set them loose, because the Prophet (God bless him
and grant him peace) prohibited the slaughtering of a goat except for
purposes of consumption.' We argue that the slaughter of an animal is
permitted for a legally sound purpose, and there is no purpose better
than the demolition of the power of the enemy. Thereafter, he is to burn
them in order to sever the benefit that can go to the unbelievers. It is like
the demolition of a building. It is different from burning them prior to
slaughter for that is prohibited.7 This is distinguished from hamstringing
the animal as that amounts to mutilation (muthla/-i). Weapons are to be
set on fire as well, and what cannot be burned is to be buried where the
unbelievers cannot find it so as to eliminate the benefit that can go to
them.
The spoils are not to be divided in the dar al-harb, not until they
are moved to the dar al-Islam. Al-Shafi'i (God bless him) said that there
is no harm in doing so. The basic rule for this, in our view, is that the
ownership of the combatants is not established in the spoils until they
are gathered and moved to the dar al-Islam. In his view such ownership
is established (before that). From this rule arise a number of issues that
we have mentioned in the Kifayat al-Muntahi. He argues that the cause
of ownership is the seizure of wealth when such wealth is permissible,
as in the case of hunt. Seizure has no meaning except the affirmation of
possession, and this stands realised. We argue on the basis of the tradi-
tion that the Prophet (God bless him and grant him peace) prohibited
the sale of spoils within the ddr al-harb,8 and the disagreement is estab-
lished with respect to it (sale). Division is sale in meaning, therefore, it
is included in it. Further, possession is both for protection and for trans-
porting property. The second meaning (transportation) does not exist
due to the ability of the unbelievers to have it released and the existence
61t is gharib and is recorded by Ibn AM Shaybah. A1-Zayla'i, vol. 3, 406.
'There are traditions on this recorded by al-Bukhãri and others. Al-Zayla'i, vol. 3,
407.
81t is gharib in the absolute sense. A1-Zayla'i, vol. 3, 408.

--- Page 1020 ---

304(cid:9) Al-Hidãyah(cid:9) BOOK XIII: SIYAR
of this ability is obvious (as the spoils are in their land). Thereafter, it
is said that the disagreement is in the issue whether division will have
its legal effects when the imam divides the spoils without examination
(immediately), because the legal effects of ownership are not established
without ownership (being transferred to the combatants). It is said that
doing so would be disapproved and it is disapproval that is close to pro-
hibition (tahrim) according to Muhammad (God bless him), for this is
what he said in response to the view of AbU HanIfah and Abü yusuf (God
bless them) that it is not permitted to divide the spoils in the dãr al-harb.
Thus, it is preferable according to Muhammad (God bless him) to divide
the spoils in the dãr al-Islam. The reason for disapproval is that the evi-
dence of prohibition has greater precedence yet it has been held back from
negating permissibility (and giving rise to prohibition), but it cannot be
held back from giving rise to disapproval.
He said: The supporting soldier in the army and the soldier partici-
pating directly in combat are the same (with respect to entitlement), due
to their equivalence with respect to the cause, which is crossing over or
witnessing the battle as is known. Likewise if a soldier has not been able
to fight due to illness or another reason, due to what we have mentioned.
If reinforcements arrive prior to their transporting the spoils to the
dãr al-Islam, they will participate with them in the spoils. Al-Shãfi'i
(God bless him) disagrees saying that this is not allowed after the cessa-
tion of hostilities, on the basis of his principle that we elaborated earlier
(that ownership results from mere taking). In our view, the right of par-
ticipation ends by the taking of possession, or by division by the imãm
within the dãr al-harb, or by the sale by him of the spoils, because by
each one of these acts ownership becomes complete cutting of the right
of participation by the reinforcements arriving later.
He said: There is no entitlement in the spoils for the vendors in the
market for the military, unless they participate in battle. Al-Shãfi'i (God
bless him) said that a share is to be given to them, due to the saying of the
Prophet (God bless him and grant him peace), "The spoils are for those
who witness the battle."9 Further, the meaning of jihad is found due the
swelling of numbers (present). We argue that their crossing over is not
with the intention of participating in battle, therefore, the apparent cause
9What the Author says is correct. It is recorded by Ibn Abi Shaybah. Al-Zayla'i, vol.
3,4o8.

--- Page 1021 ---

BOOK XIII: SIYAR(cid:9) Al-Hidãyah(cid:9) 305
is absent, thus, the real cause is taken into account, which is participation
in battle. The entitlement is implemented in accordance with the state of
such a fighter as to whether he is a rider or a foot-soldier during battle.
What he has related is mawquf at 'Umar (God be pleased with him), or
the interpretation is that if he witnesses the battle with the intention of
participating in it.
If the imam does not possess the means of transportation for trans-
porting the spoils, he is to divide the spoils among the entitled combat-
ants, but it is a division among custodians, so that they can carry them
over to the dar al-Islam. Thereafter, he recovers the spoils from them and
divides them. This feeble servant says: This is how it has been mentioned
in al-Mukhtasar, and he did not stipulate their consent in this. It is a nar-
ration of al-Siyar al-Kabir. The general statement about this issue is that
if the imãm finds carriers within the spoils, then he is to transport the
spoils on them, because both the carriers and the spoils are their wealth.
Likewise if there are in the treasury surplus bearers, because that is the
common wealth of the Muslims. If the carriers belong to the combatants
or to some of them, he is not to compel them according to the narra-
tion in al-Siyar al-Saghir, because it is hire ab initio. It is as if a person's
animal dies in a desolate place and his companion has an extra animal
(that he rents). According to the narration in al-Siyar al-Kabir, they are
to be compelled, because it is the repelling of a public injury by bearing a
private injury.
The sale of spoils within the dar al-harb, prior to division, is not per-
mitted, because there is no ownership prior to that. In this there is the
disagreement of al-Shãfi'i (God bless him) and we elaborated the princi-
ple (on which it is based).
If a combatant entitled to spoils dies within the dar al-harb, then
he has no entitlement to the spoils. If a combatant dies after the spoils
have been moved out to the dar al-Islam, then his share goes to his
heirs, because inheritance operates where there is ownership and there is
no ownership prior to possession (gathering); the ownership arises after
that. A1-Shãfi'i (God bless him) says that a combatant who dies after the
cessation of hostilities his share is inherited due to the existence of his
ownership in it in his view, and we have elaborated this.
He said: There is no harm if the army takes fodder from the dar a!-
barb and consumes the food that it finds. This feeble servant says: He
(al-Quduri) has made an unqualified statement and has not restricted it

--- Page 1022 ---

306(cid:9) Al-Hidãyah(cid:9) BOOK XIII: SIYAR
to the case of need, when it is stipulated in one narration and not stip-
ulated in another. The reason underlying the first narration is that it is
common property for the combatants, therefore, utilising it is not per-
missible without a need, as is the case with animals and dresses. The
underlying reasoning of the second narration is based upon the words
of the Prophet (God bless him and grant him peace) about the food of
',io
Khaybar, Eat it and use it for fodder, but do not carry it. Further, the
rule revolves around the evidence of need, and that is his being in the
ddr al-harb. The reason is that the combatant does not carry his food or
the fodder of his ride himself during his stay there and the supplies are
cut off. Consequently, the food consumed stays permissible due to need
according to the original rule of permissibility. This is distinguished from
weapons for he carries them with him, therefore, the evidence of need is
non-existent. At times the need may arise and then the reality is to be
taken into account. He may then use the weapons and return them to the
spoils when he no longer needs them. Animals are like weapons, while
food is like bread, meat and what is used with them like fat and oil.
He said: They are to use wood, and in some manuscripts the word is
perfume. They are to use oil for massage and to use it for oiling the hoofs
of animals, due to the occurrence of need for all this.
They are to engage in combat with whatever weapons they can find,
and all this without division of the spoils. The interpretation of this is
that when they are in need of this and do not have weapons, and we have
already explained this.
It is not permitted to them to sell any of these things or to convert
them into other forms of wealth, because sale is based upon ownership
and there is no ownership here, as has preceded. It is merely a state of
permissibility and is like a person permitted to have food. His statement,
"to convert them into other forms of wealth" is an indication that are not
to sell them for gold, silver and goods for there is no need for them. If
one of them does so he is to return the price to the spoils, because it is a
counter-value for a thing that belonged to the whole army. As for dresses
and items of use, it is considered disapproved to utilise them without
need prior to the division due to common ownership, unless the imam
distributes these among them within the ddr al-harb when they are in
"It is related by al-Bayhaqi, but similar traditions are recorded by others including
al-Bukhari. A1-Zayla'i, vol. 3, 409.

--- Page 1023 ---

BOOK XIII: SIYAR(cid:9) Al-Hidayah(cid:9) 307
need of dresses, animals and items of use. The reason is that even the
prohibited becomes permissible at the time of necessity, therefore, the
disapproved may be made permissible with less reluctance. Further, the
arrival of reinforcements is probable and the need of these persons for
these things is certain, therefore, it has a priority for consideration. He
did not mention a division of weapons, but there is no difference in real-
ity. Thus, if one of them needs them he is to be permitted to utilise them
in both cases (that is, need for weapons and need for other things). If
all of them need them, they are to be divided in both cases. This is dis-
tinguished from the case where they are in need of captive prisoners, for
they are not to be divided; the need being for something additional and
not a necessity.
He said: The person among them who converts to Islam, the meaning
being in the dãr al-/iarb, he protects himself through his Islam, because
Islam negates the commencement of enslavement, and his minor chil-
dren too, as they become Muslims as a consequence of his Islam. He also
preserves all the (movable) wealth that is in his possession, due to the
words of the Prophet (God bless him and grant him peace), "If a person
converts to Islam while possessing wealth, the wealth belongs to him."
The reason is that he was the first, in reality, to take it into his possession
as a conqueror. This applies to a deposit in the custody of a Muslim or
Dhimmi. The reason is that it is a valid possession that is protected and
the possession of the custodian is like his own possession.
If we conquer the enemy territory, then his real property (lands and
buildings) arefay' (booty). A1-Shãfi'i (God bless him) said that it belongs
to him as it is in his possession and will be treated like movable property.
We argue that the real property is in the possession of the residents of the
territory and their authority, as it is a constituent part of the dãr al-harb,
therefore, it is not in his possession in reality. It is said that this is the
opinion of Abü Hanifah (God bless him) and one opinion of AbU Yüsuf
(God bless him). In the opinion of Muhammad (God bless him), which
is also another opinion of Abü YUsuf (God bless him), it is like the rest
of his wealth. This disagreement is based upon the rule upheld by the
two jurists that (physical) possession of real property is not established in
reality, while according to Muhammad (God bless him) it is established.
"It is recorded by Abi Ya'la al-Mawsili in his Musnad. There are other traditions
conveying a similar meaning and these are recorded by al-Bukhäri and Abü DawUd.
Al-Zayla'i, vol. 3, 410.

--- Page 1024 ---

308(cid:9) Al-Hidayah(cid:9)
BOOK XIII: SIYAR
Property that is usurped and in the possession of a Muslim is booty
according to AbU Ilanifah (God bless him). Muhammad (God bless him)
said that it is not. This feeble servant says: This is how the disagreement is
recorded in al-Siyar al-Kabir. The jurists have mentioned the opinion of
Abü Yüsuf (God bless him) alongside the opinion of Muhammad (God
bless him) in the commentaries on al-Jami' al-Saghir. The two jurists
maintain that wealth is subordinated to the person, and such wealth
became protected through his conversion to Islam for it follows him for
purposes of protection. The Imãm argues that this wealth is permissible
and is owned through seizure, while the person does not become pro-
tected through Islam. Do you not see that the person is not marketable
wealth, and that it is prohibited to commit aggression against him accord-
ing to the original rule, because he is a human being. The permissibility
of aggression arises from the obstacle of his mischief, and such permissi-
bility was done away with by his Islam. This is distinguished from wealth,
which has been created for use, therefore, it is a valid subject-matter for
ownership. Legally it is not in his possession, thus, legal protection (for
such wealth) is not established.
When the Muslims are moving out of the dtr al-harb, it is not per-
mitted to them to take fodder from the spoils or to consume it, because
the necessity stands lifted and permissibility was on account of it. Further,
the right has come to be established so that his share is now inheritable
wealth. The position is not like this prior to moving over to the dãr a!-
Islam.
The surplus fodder and food that he has is to be returned to the
spoils, which means if the spoils have not been divided. A1-Shãfi'i (God
bless him) has an opinion like ours, but he has another opinion that says
that he is not to return it on the analogy of stolen wealth. We argue that
acquisition was due to the necessity of need, and this has been removed
as distinguished from the one stealing (from the enemy territory). Fur-
ther, the thief had a greater right to it prior to its transportation, and
likewise after it. After distribution (if they are in possession of the fod-
der and food), they are to give it away as charity if they are rich and to
use it if they are needy, because it is now governed by the rule of found
property due to the difficulty of returning it to the combatants entitled
to the spoils. If they utilise it after its transportation, they are to pay its
value to the combatants entitled to the spoils. This is the case when the
spoils have not been distributed. If the spoils have been distributed, they

--- Page 1025 ---

B00KXIII:SIYAR(cid:9) Al-Hidayah(cid:9) 309
give away its value as charity if they are rich. There is no liability for the
poor person, because the value stands in the place of the original thing,
and thus is assigned its rule. Allah knows what is correct.
111.1 MODES OF DIVISION
He said: The imam divides the spoils and (first) takes out a fifth from it,
due to the words of the Exalted, "a fifth share is assigned to Allah, and to
the Messenger,"" which exempt a fifth.
He is to divide the (remaining) four-fifths among those entitled to
the spoils, because the Prophet (God bless him and grant him peace)
divided four-fifths among them.13
Thereafter, the rider gets two shares and the foot-soldier one share,
according to Abü Hanifah (God bless him). The two jurists said that the
rider gets three shares, which is also the view of al-Shafi'i (God bless
him). The basis is what is related by Ibn 'Umar (God be pleased with
both) "that the Prophet (God bless him and grant him peace) granted
"14
three shares to the rider and one share to the foot-soldier. Further,
the entitlement is on the basis of wealth owned. The rider's contribu-
tion is three times that of the foot-soldier due to his being equal to those
who launch an attack, those who retreat and those who remain firmly on
the ground, while the foot-soldier is equal only to those who stand their
ground. Abü Hanifah (God bless him) relies on what is related by Ibn
'Abbás (God be pleased with both) "that the Prophet (God bless him and
grant him peace) granted the rider two shares and to the foot-soldier one
share. Further, it is related from Ibn 'Umar (God be pleased with both)
'15
"that the Prophet (God bless him and grant him peace) divided (the
spoils) giving the rider two shares and to the foot-soldier one share."6
When the two traditions conflict, the tradition besides them has to be
preferred. The reason is that those attacking and those retreating are one
category, therefore, his contribution is twice that of the foot-soldier. Con-
sequently, he is to be preferred over him by one share. In addition to this,
'2Qur'än 8: 41
1t is recorded by al-Tabarani in his Mu'jam. A1-Zayla'i, vol. 3, 412.
13
'll is recorded by all the sound compilations, except al-Nasa'i. A1-Zayla'i, vol. 3, 413.
1t is gharib, however, in the same meaning are traditions recorded by others. Al-
15
Zayla'i, vol. 3, 416-17.
16 It is gha rib in the absolute sense. Al-Zayla'i, vol. 3, 17.

--- Page 1026 ---

310(cid:9) Al-Hidãyah(cid:9) BOOK XIII: SIYAR
it is difficult to assess the excess of such contribution due to the lack of
information about it. Accordingly, the rule is based upon the obvious
reason when the rider shows two such causes: himself and his horse. The
foot-soldier possesses one such cause, thus, he is given one share due to
the deficiency.
The share is given to just one horse. Abü Yüsuf (God bless him) said
that one share is to be given for two horses due what is reported "that
the Prophet (God bless him and grant him peace) gave one share to two
horses, "7 because one can be exhausted and he may need the other. The
two jurists argue that the al-Bard' ibn Aws brought two horses, but the
Messenger of Allah (God bless him and grant him peace) gave a share
to just one horse.'8 Further, fighting is not undertaken with two horses
at the same time, therefore, the obvious cause does not point to fighting
with both, thus, the share is given to one. It is for the same reason that
the share is not given for three horses. What he has related is interpreted
to mean a reward, just as he gave a reward to Salamah ibn al-Akwah by
giving him two shares when he was a foot-soldier.
The birdhawn (non-Arabian) and the 'atäq (thoroughbred Arabian
horse) are the same, because the intimidation mentioned in the Qur'an is
attributed to the species of horses. Allah, the Exalted, says, "Against them
make ready your strength to the utmost of your power, including steeds
of war, to strike terror into (the hearts of) the enemies of Allah and your
enemies. The term horses is applied, through a single generic term, to
"19
mean barãdhin (non-Arabian), 'irãb (Arabian), hajin (mother Arabian)
and maqrif (father Arabian). If the Arabian horse is better for pursuit
and is stronger for purposes of intimidation, the birdhawn is smoother in
manoeuvring, therefore, each one of them has an acknowledged benefit
and are deemed equal.
If a person enters the dãr al-harb on horseback, but his horse dies, he
is entitled to the share of a rider. If a person enters on foot and then buys
a horse, he is entitled to the share of a foot-soldier. The response given by
al-Shãfi'i (God bless him) is the opposite of this in both cases. Likewise,
Ibn al-Mubarak has narrated from Abü Hanifah (God bless him) that he
(in the second case) is entitled to the share of a rider. The net result is that
17 1t is recorded by al-Dar'qutni in his Sunan. A1-Zayla'i, vol. 3, 418.
18 It is gharib. In fact, there is a tradition that gives the opposite meaning. Al-Zayla'i,
vol. 3, 419.
'9Qur'an 8 :6o

--- Page 1027 ---

BOOK XIII: SIYAR(cid:9) Al-Hidayah(cid:9) 311
what is considered effective in our view is the state at the time of crossing
over, while in his view it is the state at the time of termination of com-
bat. He maintains that the cause is vanquishing and fighting, therefore,
the state of a person at that time is to be considered. Crossing over is a
means to the cause, like coming out of the house. The suspension of the
rules upon fighting indicates that possibility of relying on it for deriving
rules. If there is an obstacle in the way of doing so or there is a difficulty,
then reliance should be placed upon the witnessing of the battle as that is
the closest to it (actual fighting). In our view, crossing over to the enemy
territory in itself is combat, because it is at this time that they are over-
come by fear, and the state after this is one of continuation, therefore, it
cannot be taken into account. Further, placing reliance upon the actual
act of fighting is difficult, likewise the state of witnessing the combat for
it is the time of formation of the lines of battle. Consequently, crossing
over is made to stand in its place for it is the apparent cause of participat-
ing in combat when such crossing over is with the intention of fighting.
Thus, the state of a person is determined by his state while crossing over
as to whether he is a rider or a foot-soldier. If he enters on horseback and
fights on foot due to the lack of space, he is entitled to the share of a rider
by agreement. If he enters on horseback and then sells his horse, gifts it,
rents it out, or pledges it, then according to a narration of al-Hasan from
AbU Hanifah (God bless him) he is entitled to the share of a rider giving
effect to the state at the time of crossing over. In the authentic narration
(zãhir al-riwãyah) he is entitled to the share of the foot-soldier, because
undertaking these transactions indicates that it was not his intention at
the time of crossing over to fight on horseback. If he sells the horse after
the battle is over, the share of the rider is not annulled. Likewise if he sells
it during battle according to some jurists. The correct view, however, is
that the share is annulled, because sale indicates that his purpose is to
indulge in the trading of the horse, and that he was waiting for its value
to go up.
As for the fifth (set aside at the beginning), it is divided into three
shares: a share for the orphans, a share for the needy, and a share for the
wayfarer. The poor among the near relatives are included in these types,
and are to be given precedence over them, but nothing is to be given to
the rich near relatives. Al-Shãfi'i (God bless him) said that they are to be
given a fifth of the fifth with the poor and rich being equal. The fifth is
to be divided among them on the basis of two shares for the male and

--- Page 1028 ---

312(cid:9) Al-Hidayah(cid:9) BOOK XIII: SIYAR
one for the female, and it will be for the Banü Hãshim and the Banft al-
Muttalib, but not for others, due to the words of the Exalted, "For the
near relatives,"" where no distinction has been made between the rich
and the poor. We argue that the four Khulafã' Rãshidün (God be pleased
with them) divided the fifth in the manner that we have stated, and their
acts are sufficient as a model for us. The Prophet (God bless him and
grant him peace) said, "0 People of the Banü Hãshim, Allah has deemed
disapproved for you the filth of the people and in return has granted you
a fifth of the fifth."" A substitute counter-value is established in favour
of those in whose favour the original counter-value was established, and
these are the poor relatives. The Prophet (God bless him and grant him
peace) granted this to them for their support. Do you not see that the
Prophet (God bless him and grant him peace) declared the underlying
cause as, "'They continued to be with like this during the Jahiliyyah as
well as Islam,' and he joined two of his fingers."" This indicates that the
meaning of the text is nearness of support and not nearness of kinship.
He said: The mentioning of the name of Allah, the Exalted, in rela-
tion to the fifth is for commencing the statement and as a blessing
through His name. The share of the Prophet (God bless him and grant
him peace) lapsed with his death as did the right to make the first choice
(safiyy). The reason is that the Prophet (God bless him and grant him
peace) was entitled to it due to his mission and there is no prophet after
him. Safiyy is a thing that the Prophet (God bless him and grant him
peace) would choose for himself from the spoils like a coat of mail, sword
or a slave girl.23 Al-Shãfi'i (God bless him) said that the share of the
Prophet (God bless him and grant him peace) is to be transferred to the
khalifah, but the argument against him is what we have presented.
The near relatives were entitled to a share, during the lifetime of the
Prophet (God bless him and grant him peace) due to their support, on
the basis of what we have related and due to poverty after his time. This
feeble servant, may Allah protect him, says: The statement mentioned (by
al-Quduri) is the opinion of al-Karkhi (God bless him). Al-Tahãwi (God
bless him) said that the share of the poor among them has also lapsed on
"Qur'an 8: 41
2111 is gha rib and is recorded by al-Tabarãni. A1-Zayla'i, vol. 3, 424.
2211 is recorded by Abü Dãwud, al-Nasã'i and Ibn Majah. A1-Zayla'i, vol. 3, 425.
230pinion of Ibn 'Abbas (God be pleased with both), and a tradition recorded byAbü
DawUd. A1-Zayla'i, vol. 4,426-27.

--- Page 1029 ---

BOOK XIII: SIYAR(cid:9) Al-Hidayah(cid:9) 313
the grounds of consensus, which we related. Further, it includes within
it the meaning of charity in consideration of the avenue of expenditure,
therefore, it is prohibited just like the prohibition of the wages of sadaqah.
The reasoning underlying the first view, and it is said that this is the sound
view, is based on the report that 'Umar (God be pleased with him) did
give it to the poor among them, while the consensus took place about the
extinction of the share of the rich. As for their poor they are included in
the three categories of the fifth.
If one or two persons enter the dar al-harb without the permission of
the imam, and acquire something it is not to be subjected to the taking
of a fifth. The reason is that spoils are taken after conquest and overpow-
ering and not through pilferage and theft, and the setting aside of a fifth
is from the spoils. If one or two persons enter with the permission of
the imam, then in this case there are two opinions. According to the well
known opinion a fifth is taken, because the imam by granting them per-
mission made their help binding on himself through support, therefore,
they become like a military contingent.
If a group, that possesses military strength, enters and takes some-
thing it is subjected to the fifth even when the imam did not grant them
permission for entry, because it was taken with the use of force and dom-
ination, therefore, it is like spoils. Further, it is obligatory upon the imam
to lend them support for if he withdraws support it will result in weaken-
ing the Muslims, as distinguished from one or two persons in whose case
it is not obligatory on him to help them. Allah knows what is correct.
111.2 REWARDS
He said: There is no harm if the imam promises rewards during battle
in order to encourage the soldiers to fight. Thus, he may say, "Whoever
kills an opponent may take the belongings on his person' or he may
say to a detachment, "I promise you a fourth after the fifth is set aside?'
This means after a fifth has been taken from the spoils. The reason is that
encouragement is recommended (mandüb). Allah, the Exalted, has said,
"0 Prophet! Rouse the Believers to the fight."24 The granting of rewards
is a form of encouragement. Thereafter, encouragement is undertaken
through what has been said and sometimes it is through other methods,
Qur'ãn 8 : 65
24

--- Page 1030 ---

314(cid:9) Al-Hidayah(cid:9)
BOOK XIII: SIYAR
except that it is not for the imam to give away the entire spoils as reward as
in this there is annulment of the right of all. If he does that while sending
a raiding party then it is permitted, because this is left to his discretion
and the securing of interests may demand this.
He is not to make a reward after the spoils have been secured within
the dar al-Islam, because the rights of others are now entrenched in the
spoils after their collection.
He said: The exception is the fifth, because the combatants winning
the spoils have no right in it.
If he does not grant the belongings on the person of the enemy com-
batant to one who slays him, then they form part of the total spoils, and
the slayer and others have equal rights with respect to them. Al-Shãfi'i
(God bless him) said that the salab (belongings on the person of the com-
batant) belong to the slayer, if he is one who is eligible for a share and
when he slays him in combat, due to the words of the Prophet (God bless
him and grant him peace), "Whoever slays an enemy is entitled to the
belongings on his person," 25 It is obvious that this tradition a mandatory
provision of the law (not discretionary reward), because he was sent for
this. Further, a person slain in frontal combat results in a greater benefit
(for jihad), therefore, the person slaying him has the exclusive right to his
belongings as an expression of the difference between him and the oth-
ers. We maintain that it has been acquired through the power of the army,
thus, it is a part of the spoils, and is to be divided in the manner laid down
in the text (verse). The Prophet (God bless him and grant him peace) said
to Habib ibn Salamah, "You have no right to the personal belongings of
the person you slay except with the consent of your imam."" What he has
related probably implies a mandatory provision of the law and it probably
implies a reward, therefore, we construe it to mean the latter on the basis
of what we have related. The additional benefit is not taken into account
for a single species (advancing and retreating), as we mentioned.
Salab includes the clothes worn by the slain fighter, his weapons,
ride, and whatever is on his ride like a saddle or instruments. It also
includes what is upon his load animal in his bag or around his waist.
What is besides this is not part of the salab. The things that may be with
his slave on another animal are not part of the salab. Thereafter, the right
251t is recorded by all the sound compilations, except al-Nasã'i. Al-Zayla'i, vol. 3, 428.
26
The correct name is Maslamah, and the tradition is recorded by al-Tabarãni. Al-
Zayla'i, vol. 3, 430.

--- Page 1031 ---

BOOK XIII: SIYAR(cid:9) Al-Hidayah(cid:9) 315
to a reward cuts off the right of the rest over it. As for ownership it is
established after gathering in the dãr al-Islam, as has been stated earlier.
Thus, if the imãm were to say, "Whoever captures a female she belongs to
him' and thereafter a person does make a female captive, establishes that
she is not with child, it is not permitted to him to have intercourse with
her. Likewise, he is not to sell her. This is the position according to Abü
Hanifah and Abü Yüsuf (God bless them). Muhammad (God bless him)
maintains that he has the right to have intercourse with her and to sell her
too, because ownership is established through tanfil (promise of reward)
in his view, just as it is established through division (of the spoils) within
the där al-harb and purchase from an enemy. The obligation of compen-
sation as a consequence of destruction, it is said, is also based upon this
disagreement. Allah knows what is correct.

--- Page 1032 ---

316(cid:9) A1-Hidayah(cid:9) BOOK XIII: SIYAR

--- Page 1033 ---

Chapter
112
Conquests by the Unbelievers
If the Turks (Unbelievers) overcome the Byzantines, enslave them and
seize their wealth, it belongs to them, because seizure is realised in wealth
that it permissible (for them), and that is the cause, as we shall elaborate,
God, the Exalted, willing. If we overcome the Turks, then whatever we
find of this wealth with them is lawful for us, on the analogy of their
remaining wealth.
If they seize our wealth and, God forbid, are able to secure it within
their territory, they come to own such wealth. Al-Shafi'i (God bless him)
said that they do not come to own it as such seizure is prohibited initially
(in our territory) and finally (in their territory after seizure). The pro-
hibited does not become a cause for ownership, as is known through the
principle upheld by the opponent (al-Shãfii). We maintain that seizure
has taken place with respect to permissible wealth, therefore, it occurs as
a cause of ownership to meet the needs of the subject, just like seizure
of their wealth by us. This is so, as protection of wealth is established in
contravention to the evidence' due to the necessity of enabling the owner
to utilise the thing. If such a facility is eroded, the wealth reverts to its
original state of permissibility, except that seizure of wealth does not take
place unless it has been secured within the dãr. The reason is that seizure
is an expression of exercising control over the subject-matter by way of
present use (in our territory) and as a final consequence (in their own).
A thing prohibited due to an external factor (but not prohibited in itself),
if it can be a valid cause for something that is superior to ownership (as
in the case of prayer in unlawfully possessed property), which is spiritual
reward, then what do you think about ownership in the temporal world.
"It is He Who hath created for you all things that are on earth." Qur'an 2: 29
317

--- Page 1034 ---

318(cid:9) Al-Hidãyah(cid:9) BOOK XIII: SIYAR
If the Muslims come to seize the wealth and the owners come across
it prior to division, then the wealth belongs to them without any com-
pensation, but if they come across it after division, they may take it by
paying its value if they so wish. This is based upon the saying of the
Prophet (God bless him and grant him peace), "If you find it prior to
division, it is yours without any cost, but if you find it after division, then
112
it is yours after paying its value. The reason is that the ownership of the
original owner has been extinguished without his consent, therefore, he
has a right to repossess it taking his interest into account (as the property
is not owned by others as yet), except that repossessing it after division
results in an injury to the person from whom it is taken by extinguishing
his private ownership, thus, he is to take it by paying its value so that the
interests on both sides are balanced. The joint ownership prior to divi-
sion is public, therefore, the injury is less and it is for this reason that he
can take it without paying its value.
If a trader enters the dãr al-harb, buys this property and brings it
over to the dãr al-Islam, then the original owner has an option: if he
likes he can buy it for the price that the trader paid for it, or he may
leave it. The reason is that taking it without compensation will result in
an injury. Do you not see that he has paid a counter-value in exchange for
it, therefore, the balanced view is to be found in what we said. If he has
bought it in exchange for goods, he is to pay him the value of the goods.
If they made a gift of the property to the Muslim, he is to pay its value,
because private ownership is established for him and it cannot be eroded
without payment of value. If the property is (now) part of the spoils, and
it is fungible, he may take it prior to the division, but he cannot take it
after division, because taking it by giving a similar is futile. Likewise if
it is gifted property, he cannot take it on the basis of what we have said.
Similarly, if he has purchased it with a similar corresponding in quantity
and description.
He said: If a slave is made captive and a man buys him then brings
him over to the dar al-Islam, but his eye is lost and he takes compensa-
tion for that, the master may acquire the slave by paying the price for
which he bought him from the enemy. As for taking him for the price it
is due to what we have stated. He (the master) does not take the compen-
sation (for the eye). The reason is that the ownership in the slave is valid.
2 1t is recorded by al-Dar'qutni and al-Bayhaqi. A1-Zayla'i, vol. 3, 434.

--- Page 1035 ---

BOOK XIII: SIYAR(cid:9) Al-Hidüyah(cid:9) 319
If he takes him, he takes him by paying a similar, which is futile. No part
of the price is reduced, because the attributes are not a counter-value for
any part of the price. This is distinguished from pre-emption (shufah)
as in the bargain, when it is transferred to the pre-emptor, the property
is in possession of the buyer through a purchase that is vitiated (rsid).
The attributes are subject to liability in this case, as in the case of usurpa-
tion. In the case under examination, however, the sale is valid,3 thus, the
distinction is made.
If they take a slave prisoner and a man buys him for one thousand
dirhams, but they take him prisoner again moving him to the där a!-
harb where another man buys him for one thousand dirhams, then the
first master does not have the right to take him from the second buyer
by paying the price, because imprisonment did not take place during his
ownership. The first buyer may take him from the second on paying the
price, because imprisonment took place during his ownership. There-
after, the first master may take him by paying two thousand dirhams,
if he likes. The reason is that he came to own him through two prices,
therefore, he is to be taken on payment of both. Likewise, if the person
from whose possession he was made captive the second time (the first
buyer) is missing, the original owner cannot take him (from the second
buyer) on the analogy of the situation when he was present.
The enemy cannot come to own, by defeating us, our mudabbar
slaves, ummahät al-awläd, mukätab slaves, or our free persons, while
we come to own all such persons against their claim. The reason is that
the cause gives rise to ownership in its subject-matter when the subject-
matter is permissible wealth. The free person is completely protected, and
so also those besides him, because freedom stands established in their
case in some respects. This is distinguished from their slaves as the shar'
(law) has annulled their protection as a recompense for their offence and
turned them into slaves. There is, on the other hand, no offence on the
part of our slaves.
If a slave owned by a Muslim runs away entering enemy territory
and they capture him, they do not come to own him according to AbU
IIanifah (God bless him). The two jurists said that they do come to own
him, because protection was linked with the master due to the existence
'As the sale was valid in this case, the buyer was not holding property with liability.
In shufa/i and other cases of vitiation, he does hold it with the accompanying liability.

--- Page 1036 ---

320(cid:9) Al-Hidayah(cid:9) BOOK XIII: SIYAR
of his possession and this has been extinguished, therefore, if they cap-
ture him from the dãr al-Islam they come to own him. The Imãm argues
that he comes to acquire possession over himself by moving out of our
territory, because it was suspended due to the intervening possession of
the master over him so as to enable him to benefit from him. As the
possession of the master is removed, his own possession over himself
emerges and he becomes protected in his own right; he is no longer a
subject-matter of ownership. This is distinguished from the case of the
runaway (within the dãr al-Islam), because the possession of the master
over him still remains due to the possession of the residents of the dãr,
and this prevents the emergence of his own possession. When ownership
is not established for them according to Abü Hanifah (God bless him),
the original owner takes him without paying anything, irrespective of his
being gifted, bought or taken as part of spoils, before or after division,
and the compensation is to be paid from the treasury, as it is not possible
to reverse the division due to the different persons entitled to spoils and
the difficulty of their coming together. Further, he (the combatant or the
trader) cannot claim the reward (ju'l) for the capture of the slave for he
was acting on his own account under the assumption that he owned him.
If a camel runs away to their side and they catch it, they come to own
it, due to the realisation of control over it. The reason is that the camel has
no way of exercising possession over itself on going out of our territory
as distinguished from the slave on the basis of what we stated.
If a man buys the camel and brings it over to the dar al-Islam, the
(former) owner has the right, if he likes, to take it for the price paid, as
we elaborated.
If a slave runs away and with him are a horse and assets, and all these
are captured by the polytheists, but thereafter a man buys all these and
brings them over to the dãr al-Islam, then the owner will take the slave
without compensation, while he will take the horse and the assets with
compensation. This is the view according to AbU Hanifah (God bless
him). The two jurists say that if he likes he will take the slave and what
was with him for the price paid. This is based upon the analogy of a
group of things upon individual things, and we have elaborated the rules
for each individual case.
If an enemy enters our territory on safe-conduct and buys a Muslim
slave taking him over to enemy territory, the slave stands emancipated
according to AbU Hanifah (God bless him). The two jurists said that he is

--- Page 1037 ---

BOOK XIII: SIYAR(cid:9) Al-Hidüyah(cid:9) 321
not emancipated. The reason is that the surrender of possession resulted
through a specified way, which is sale, and the authority to restrain him
ended (upon his entry into enemy territory), therefore, he remains in his
possession as a slave. Abü Hanifah (God bless him) argues that the release
of the Muslim from the degrading control of an unbeliever is obligatory,
therefore, a condition is stipulated, which is the difference of territo-
ries, and is made to stand in the place of the underlying cause; namely,
emancipation to secure his release. It is just like making three menstrual
periods in place of separation when one of the spouses from the enemy
territory embraces Islam.
If a slave owned by an enemy embraces Islam and then moves over
to our territory or if the territory is conquered, then he stands eman-
cipated. Likewise if their slaves come over to the military camp of the
Muslims, they stand emancipated. This is based upon the report that
some of the slaves of Ta'if converted to Islam and came over to the
Messenger of Allah (God bless him and grant him peace), so he gave a
decision about their emancipation. He said, "They are emancipated by
Allah."4 Further, he preserved his own self by coming over to us and relin-
quishing his master, or by aligning himself with the protective power of
the Muslims when they conquer the enemy territory. Considering him to
have possession over himself is superior to considering the possession of
Muslims over him, because his possession over himself was established
first, thus, what is needed in his interest is to strengthen it, while it is in
their interest to establish possession over him ab initio (but his posses-
sion is superior), therefore, his possession is preferred. Allah knows what
is correct.
41t is recorded by Ahmad and Ibn AN Shaybah in their Musnads. A1-Zayla'i, vol. 3,
436

--- Page 1038 ---

322(cid:9) - Al-Hidayah(cid:9) BOOK XIII: SIYAR

--- Page 1039 ---

Chapter
113
Entering Enemy Territory on Amãn
If a Muslim enters the dãr al-harb as a trader, it is not lawful for him
to transgress against any of their wealth or their persons. The reason is
that by seeking amãn he undertook not to be aggressive against them.
Transgression after this amounts to treachery, and treachery is prohib-
ited, unless the enemy ruler commits treachery against these traders by
taking their wealth or imprisoning them, or someone from among the
enemy does that with the knowledge of the ruler, who does not prevent
them from doing so. In this case, they are the ones who committed breach
of the assurance. This is distinguished from the case of the prisoner for
he is not on safe-conduct, therefore, transgression is permitted for him,
even if they voluntarily let him move around freely.
If he deceives them, that is the trader and takes something and
returns with it, he owns it through a prohibited ownership, due to
seeking control over permitted wealth, except that it has been acquired
through deception, and this gives rise to an element of wickedness in it.
He is to be ordered to give it away as charity. The reason is that prohibi-
tion due to an external factor does not prevent the cause (of ownership)
from taking effect, as we have explained.
If a Muslim enters the dr al-harb on amãn and an enemy gives him
a loan, or he gives the enemy a loan, or one of them usurps the prop-
erty of the other, and thereafter he comes back and grants the enemy
amãn, the claims of one against the other are not admissible. The reason
is that adjudication relies on authority (jurisdiction), and there was no
authority at all at the time of the giving of the loan nor at the time of the
adjudication against the person on amãn, because he did not agree to be
bound by the ahkãm of Muslims in his transactions occurring in the past;
323

--- Page 1040 ---

324(cid:9) Al-Hidayah(cid:9) BooK XIII: SIYAR
he did so for future transactions. As for usurpation, the property moved
into the ownership of the usurper who misappropriated it due to control
over unprotected wealth, as we have explained. The same applies if two
enemy persons undertake these transactions and then come over to our
territory, due to what we have said.
If two enemy persons come over to us after embracing Islam, the
issues of their debts are to be adjudicated, but not the case of usurpation.
As for the loan transactions they were concluded in a valid manner due
to the existence of consent, and jurisdiction is established at the time of
adjudication due to their agreeing to abide by the ahkãm of Islam. As for
usurpation it is controlled by what we elaborated, that is, he came to own
it and there is no element of sin in the enemy's wealth so that he may be
asked to return it.
If a Muslim enters the dar al-harb and usurps an enemy's property
after which both come over as Muslims, then he is to be ordered to return
the usurped property, but a judgement (decree) is not to be rendered
about usurpation. As for the absence of a decree, it is due to what we
have elaborated, that is, it is his wealth now. In the case of the order for
returning the property, it means by issuing a fatwa about it insofar as
there is an irregularity pertaining to the wealth for he committed breach
of his compact.
If two Muslims go to the dar al-harb on amän and one of them kills
the other, intentionally or by mistake, then the killer has to pay diyah
(blood-money) from his own wealth, while he is liable for expiation in
the case of mistake (manslaughter). As for expiation, it is based upon
the absolute meaning in the Qur'an, while diyah is paid as the protection
established within the dar al-Islam through preservation is not annulled
due to the incident of entering the enemy territory on amãn. Retaliation
(qisas) does not become obligatory, because it is not possible to extract
it without controlling power (jurisdiction), and there is no such power
without the presence of the imam and a community of the Muslims, but
they are not found in the dar al-harb. Diyah is to be paid from his per-
sonal wealth as the 'aqilah does not pay on account of murder, and in the
case of mistake too, because they (members of the 'aqilah) do not have
the ability to prevent him due to a difference of the dãrs when the obliga-
tion of payment is placed upon them for neglecting such prevention.
If they are both prisoners and one of them kills the other, or a Mus-
lim trader there kills a Muslim prisoner, then there is no liability for the

--- Page 1041 ---

BOOK XIII: SIYAR(cid:9) Al-Hidtyah(cid:9) 325
killer nor is there expiation in the case of mistake, according to Abü
Hanifah (God bless him). The two jurists say in the case of prisoners that
he is liable for diyah in the case of mistake and intentional killing. The
reason is that protection is not annulled due to the incident of imprison-
ment, just as it is not annulled due to the incident of seeking amãn, as we
have elaborated. Retaliation is denied due to the absence of the preventive
power of the state (jurisdiction), while diyah is imposed on his personal
wealth as we stated. Abü Hanifah (God bless him) argues that through
imprisonment he comes to fall under their control as a result of being
in their overpowering possession. It is for this reason that he becomes a
resident (for prayer) through their being resident and one on a journey
through their travel, therefore, the original preservation is annulled, and
he becomes like a Muslim who has not migrated to our territory. Expi-
ation is specific to mistake, because there is no expiation in the case of
intentional homicide in our view. AJlãh knows what is correct.
113.1 GRANTING ENTRY TO THE ENEMY
He said: If an enemy enters our territory as a musta'min he is not to stay
for more than a year, and the imam will convey to him the statement,
"If you stay for a whole year I will impose jizyah on you." The basis is
the rule that an enemy cannot stay permanently in our territory, except
through slavery or on payment of jizyah. The reason is that he becomes a
spy for them and grants support against us, and this will cause an injury
to the Muslims. He will be enabled to stay for a short period, because
denying this will result in the termination of supplies and acquisitions,
and it will close the door of trade. Consequently, we separated these two
situations with the duration of a year for that is a period for which jizyah
is imposed, thus, stay is allowed in the interest of jizyah. Thereafter, if he
returns to his land after the communication from the imam prior to the
completion of one year then there is nothing to stop him. If he stays on
for a year he becomes a Dhimmi. The reason is that when he stays on
after the directive of the imam he agrees to bind himself to the payment
of jizyah, thus, he becomes a Dhimmi. The imam has the discretion to fix
a period for this that is less than a year like a month or two months.
If he stays for the period (of a year), after the communication from
the imam, he becomes a Dhimmi, due to what we said and thereafter
he is not permitted to return to the dar al-barb. The reason is that the

--- Page 1042 ---

326(cid:9) Al-Hidayah(cid:9) BOOK XIII: SIYAR
contract of dhimmah cannot be terminated, for in this is the termination
ofjizyah and making his children declare war on us. In this there is injury
for the Muslims.
If an enemy enters our territory on amän and buys kharaj land, then
the imposition of kharaj on him turns him into a Dhimmi. The reason
is that kharaj on land is like kharaj on the person, and if he commits to
pay it he consents to staying on in our territory. He does not, however,
become a Dhimmi by the mere purchase for he may be buying it for pur-
poses of trade. When it becomes binding on him to pay the kharaj, he
becomes bound to pay the jizyah for the next year, as he has become a
Dhimmi due to the imposition of kharaj and the period is worked out
from the time of his presence. His statement in the Book: "When kharaj
is imposed on him he is a Dhimmi' is a clear statement about the condi-
tion of imposition, therefore, many of the rules are to be extended from
it, so do not be oblivious of this.
If a woman enters on amãn and marries a Dhimmi, she becomes a
Dhimmiyyah, because she has accepted the obligation of staying in sub-
ordination to her husband. If a male enemy enters on amãn and marries
a Dhimmi woman, he does not become a Dhimmi. The reason is that it
is possible for him to divorce her and return to his land, therefore, he has
not accepted the obligation of staying on.
The wealth of the residents of the enemy territory that is gathered by
the Muslims without fighting will be spent upon the interests of the Mus-
lims like the avenues of kharaj. The jurists said that it is like land from
which the residents have been expelled and is like jizyah, thus, there is no
fifth in it. AI-Shãfi'i (God bless him) said that it is subject to a fifth on the
analogy of spoils. We rely on the report that "the Prophet (God bless him
and grant him peace) took jizyah, and so also 'Umar and Mu'ãdh (God be
pleased with them) and they deposited this in the treasury without taking
a fifth from it."' The reason is that it is wealth that has been acquired due
to the strength of the Muslims without engaging in battle. This is differ-
ent from spoils for these are owned by the direct action of the combatants
entitled to them and also through the strength of the Muslims, therefore,
a fifth is due from the spoils. The fifth is due on the basis of one rea-
son, while the combatants are entitled to spoils for another reason. In
'It is recorded by Abü DãwUd in Kitab al-Kharãj. A1-Zayla'i, vol. 3, 437.

--- Page 1043 ---

BOOK XIII: SIYAR(cid:9) Al-Hidãyah(cid:9) 327
this there is another basis that we have already mentioned. Consequently,
there is no meaning in charging a fifth from them.
If an enemy embraces Islam in the dãr al-iarb and is killed inten-
tionally by a Muslim, or by mistake, and he has Muslim heirs over there,
then the killer is not liable in anyway, except for expiation on account of
manslaughter. A1-Shãfi'i (God bless him) said that he is liable for diyah
in the case of manslaughter and for retaliation (qisas) in the case of mur-
der, because he spilled protected blood. This is due to the protective
factor and that is Islam, for it brings dignity with it. This (obligation
for blood money and retaliation) is due to the fact that protection as a
matter of principle gives rise to sin (for its violation) by the attainment
of an essential deterrent through it (against violation), and it is estab-
lished by consensus. It also contains an element of financial value in it
for the perfection of defence through it. It (the financial aspect), there-
fore, is an additional attribute (besides the element of sin for violation),
thus, it is linked to what is linked to the fundamental principle. We rely
on the words of the Exalted, "If the deceased belonged to a people at
war with you, and he was a believer, the freeing of a believing slave (is
enough). If he belonged to a people with whom ye have treaty of mutual
alliance, compensation should be paid to his family, and a believing slave
be freed."' The Almighty deemed the entire liability to be emancipation,
(and this is understood) by recourse to the character fa (of consequence)
or that it is the only thing mentioned and that negates any other lia-
bility. The reason is that sin-creating protection is related to humanity,
because a human being has been created to bear the burden of taklif
(obligation) and to maintain its requirements by non-aggression. Wealth
is subservient to it (to humanity). As for the financial value, the basis
for that is wealth (not humanity), because valuation is permitted where
a restoration of loss is required, and this takes place in wealth not in the
person (life). The basis is that the condition of similarity is a condition
for restoration, and this is possible in wealth not in the person. Conse-
quently, the person is subservient. Thereafter, the protection subject to
valuation in the case of wealth is based upon preservation within the dãr,
because its integrity is ensured through the authority (of the Muslims)
to protect it. The same applies to persons, except that the shar' (law) has
annulled the consideration of protection (authority) of the unbelievers
'Qur'an 4: 92

--- Page 1044 ---

328(cid:9) Al-Hidayah(cid:9) BOOK XIII: SIYAR
insofar as it has granted the authority to annul it. The apostate and the
musta'min in our territory are legally presumed to be in their territory
due to their intention to migrate to their dãr.
If a person kills a Muslim, who has no heirs, by mistake or he kills
an enemy who was visiting us on amãn and had embraced Islam, then
the diyah (blood money) is to be paid by the 'aqilah (supporting clan)
to the imam, and he (the killer) is also liable to expiation. The reason is
that he has killed a protected person by mistake and it must be judged
on the analogy of all other protected persons. The meaning of his words
"to the imãm" is that he has the right to take it when there are no heirs.
If he kills him intentionally, then the imãm has the right to execute him
(by way of retaliation) or to take diyah. The reason is that the person was
protected, the homicide was intentional, and the the wall is known, and
these are the public or the sultan. The Prophet (God bless him and grant
him peace) said, "The sultan is the wall (heir) of the person who does not
have a wall."3 The meaning of his statement, "or to take diyah," is that he
does so by way of settlement (sulh), because intention gives rise to retalia-
tion that is specified. The reason is that payment of blood-money is more
beneficial in this case than retaliation, therefore, he has the authority to
settle for money. He does not have the right to pardon, because the right
belongs to the public and his authority is that of a fiduciary, and a fidu-
ciary cannot extinguish their rights without compensation. Allah knows
what is correct.
3This has preceded in the early sections on marriage. A1-Zayla'i, vol. 3, 437. It is
recorded by Abi DãwUd, al-Tirmidhi and Ibn Mãjah as well as others from 'A'ishah
(God be pleased with her). A1-Zayla'i, vol. 3,195.

--- Page 1045 ---

Chapter
114
'Ushr and Kharãj
He said: All Arab lands are 'ushr lands, and they extend from 'Udhayb
towards the highest rock formations at Mahrah in Yemen up to the
boundary of Syria. The Sawãd is kharãj land and it is between 'Udhayb
up to 'Aqabat Halwãn and from al-Tha'labiyyah, it is said from 'Math,
up to 'Abbãdãn. The reason is that the Prophet (God bless him and grant
him peace) and the Khulafã' Rãshidün (God be pleased with them) did
not take kharãj from the lands of the Arabs,' and that is because this land
is like booty, therefore, such a charge is not established against their lands
just as it is not established for their persons (jizyah). The basis is that a
condition for the people of kharãj is that they abide by their unbelief,
as was the case in the Sawãd lands. Nothing besides Islam, or the sword
(death), is acceptable from the Arab polytheists. 'Umar (God be pleased
with him), when he conquered the Sawãd, imposed kharaj upon it in
the presence of the Companions (God be pleased with them),' and he
imposed it upon Egypt when it was conquered by 'Amr ibn al-'As. Like-
wise, the Companions (God be pleased with them) arrived at a consensus
for imposing kharäj on Syria.
He said: The land of the Sawãd is owned by its residents and their sale
of the land is valid and so are their transactions with respect to it. The
reason is that when the imãm conquers land through the mobilisation of
the armies and by force, he has a right to keep the residents settled on the
land and to impose a per head kharäj on them. Consequently, the lands
stay in the ownership of the residents, and we have presented this earlier.
'It is recorded by Abü 'Ubayd ibn al-Salläm in Kitãb al-Amwãl. A1-Zayla'i, vol.3, 438.
'The same tradition mentioned in the previous note. Al-Zayla'i, vol. 3, 438.
329

--- Page 1046 ---

330(cid:9) Al-Hidiyah(cid:9) BOOK XIII: SIYAR
He said: All land that has been surrendered by its residents, or has
been conquered by the mobilisation of the armies, and is distributed
among those entitled to the spoils is 'ushr land. The reason is that there
is a primary need to distribute it among Muslims, and imposition of 'ushr
is suitable for it insofar as it carries within it the meaning of worship.
Further, it is lighter as it pertains to the produce itself.
All land that is conquered by the mobilisation of the armies and the
residents allowed to remain settled on them, is kharäj land. Likewise
if the land is annexed through negotiation, because the need primarily
is to distribute it among the unbelievers, and kharãj is suitable for this.
Makkah is excluded from this, because the Messenger of Allah (God bless
him and grant him peace) conquered it through the mobilisation of the
armies, but left it for its residents without imposing kharãj on them.'
It is stated in al-Jami'a1-Saghr that all land conquered by the mobil-
isation of forces, when the water of canals passes through it, is kharãj
land. The land that does not get water from the canals and relies on
springs, is 'ushr land. The reason is that 'ushr pertains to the produce
of land and its produce is through its waters, therefore, what is taken into
account is irrigation whether through the water of 'ushr or the water of
kharãj.
He said: If a person revives barren land, then according to AbU YUsuf
(God bless him) it is to be assessed according to its proximity. If it is
within the bounds of kharãj land, that is, near it, it is kharãj land, but if
it is within the bounds of 'ushr land, it is 'ushr land. Basrah, in his view,
is 'ushr land on the basis of the consensus of the Companions (God be
pleased with them).4 The reason is that the boundaries of a thing give
it its governing rule, like the courtyard of a house is given the rule of the
house so that the owner is permitted to use it. Similarly, it is not permitted
to take land that is within a settlement. Analogy dictated that Basrah be
khardj land, because it is within the sphere of kharaj land, except that the
Companions (God be pleased with them) imposed 'ushr on it, therefore,
analogy is given up due to their consensus (ijmã').
Muhammad (God bless him) said that if he revives the land with a
well that he dug, or with a spring that he unearthed, or the water of the
3There are various traditions about this with one being recorded by Muslim. Al-
Zayla'i, vol. 3, 439.
41t was mentioned by Ibn 'Umar (God be pleased with both) as well as others. Al-
Zayla'i, vol. 3, 440.

--- Page 1047 ---

BOOK XIII: SIYAR(cid:9) Al-Hidayah(cid:9) 331
Tigris or the Euphrates, or a large stream that no one owns, then it is
'ushr land. Likewise if he revives it with rainwater. If he revives it with
the canals that were dug by non-Arabs, like the Nahr al-Malik and Nahr
al-Yazdjard, then it is kharj land, due to what we said, by taking the
water into consideration as that is the cause of development. The reason
is that it is not possible to impose kharãj on a Muslim ab initio against his
will, therefore, the water is taken into account, because irrigation with
kharãj water is a binding evidence.
He said: The kharäj imposed by 'Umar (God be pleased with him)
on the people of Sawãd was one Hashmi cafiz for each jarib irrigated by
water, and this was one sà' and a dirham. On a jarib of rathah (clover,
rich pasture land) it was five dirhams, while on a jarib of continuously
planted vines (vineyard) or continuously planted date-palms it was ten
dirhams. This is what is transmitted from 'Umar (God be pleased with
him). He sent 'Uthmãn ibn Hunayf to undertake a cadastral survey of the
Sawád of Iraq, while he made Hudhayfah supervise his work. He surveyed
the land and it came to 36,000,000 jaribs on which he imposed the kharãj
that we have mentioned. This took place in the presence of the Compan-
ions (God be pleased with them) and there was no one who opposed this,
thus, it resulted in a consensus on their part.5 The burden of producing
varies. Thus, the burden to be borne for (expense and labour) vineyards
is the least, for crops it is the maximum, while the burden for the ratbah
is in between these two. The imposition of the levy varies according to the
burden. Accordingly, the obligation in case of vineyards is the maximum,
for crop cultivation it is the least, while for rathah is the average of the
two.
He said: In the categories besides these, like saffron and garden pro-
duce and others, the imposition is varied according to the ability to pro-
duce, because there is no imposition narrated for them from 'Umar (God
be pleased with him), and he too (presumably) took into account the
ability to produce, therefore, we take the ability to produce into account
in anything in which there is no imposition (from him). The jurists said:
The maximum for the ability to produce is that the obligation for pay-
ment reach one-half of the produce, and it is not to exceed this. The
reason is that imposition of one-half is based upon true fairness, for we
A11 this is found in the tradition above that was recorded by Abu 'Ubayd ibn al-
5
Sallam. A1-Zayla'i, vol. 3, 440-41.

--- Page 1048 ---

332(cid:9) A1-Hidayah(cid:9) BOOK XIII: SIYAR
had the right to divide up the land among those entitled to the spoils.
Bustãn is each land that has a boundary wall around it and it includes
various kinds of date-palms as well as other trees. In our lands the impo-
sition on all land is on the basis of dirhams and the reduction as well,
because estimation must be on the basis of the ability to produce in what-
ever terms it is worked out.
He said: If they are unable to pay what is imposed on them, the imam
is to reduce the imposition. Decreasing the imposition due to less pro-
duction is valid on the basis of consensus (ijmã'). Do you not examine
the statement of 'Umar (God be pleased with him), "Perhaps, you two
have placed a greater burden on the land than it can bear." They replied,
"No. In fact, we imposed what it can bear, and had we increased it, the
land would bear that too."' This indicates the permissibility of decreasing
the burden. As for increasing the levy with an increase in production, it
is permitted according to Muhammad (God be pleased with him) on the
analogy of decrease in case of loss of production. According to Abü YUsuf
(God bless him), it is not permitted, because 'Umar (God bless him) did
not increase it when he was told about the greater paying ability.7
If the kharäj land is covered with water (flood or water-logging), or
its supply of water is cut off, or the crop is struck by some calamity, then
there is no kharaj on it. The reason is that the possibility of harvesting
is lost, which is the estimated production that is taken into account for
the imposition of kharaj. In the case where the crop has been affected by a
calamity, the estimated production is lost for part of the year, whereas the
land being productive throughout the year is a condition as in the case of
wealth subject to zakãt (therefore it is not imposed) or the rule depends
upon the actual production when it is actually produced.
He said: If the owner suspends production, he is liable for khar4j.
The reason is that the ability is there and it is he who has caused its loss.
The jurists said: If a person moves to cheaper of two products without
an excuse has to pay the kharãj for the more expensive product, because
it is he who has caused the waste of the excess. This is known, but a rul-
ing will not be issued on this basis so that the unjust do not acquire the
justification to extort the wealth of people.
61t is recorded by al-Bukhäri in his Sahih. A1-Zayla'i, vol. 3, 441.
'This too is found in the tradition recorded by AbU 'Ubayd. Al-Zayla'i, vol. 3, 441.

--- Page 1049 ---

BOOK XIII: SIYAR(cid:9) Al-Hidayah(cid:9) 333
If a person from among those who are liable for kharãj converts to
Islam, kharãj will be charged from him in the same way. The reason is
that it carries within it a burden (on the land), which will be considered
a burden while it exists, and its imposition on a Muslim is possible.
It is permitted to a Muslim to buy kharäj land from a Dhimmi and
the kharãj will be charged from him, due to what we have said. There
is a sound report that the Companions (God be pleased with them)
purchased kharãj land and used to pay its kharaj.8 This indicates the per-
missibility of sale and the charging of kharãj with its payment being made
by a Muslim without any disapproval.
There is no 'ushr on the produce of kharãj land. A1-Shãfi'i (God bless
him) said that the two are to be combined, because these are two separate
claims that have been imposed on two separate subject-matters for two
different causes, therefore, they do not negate each other. We rely on the
words of the Prophet (God bless him and grant him peace), "Ushr and
kharaj are not to be combined for the land owned by a Muslim?'9
Further, none of the just or unjust imãms ever combined the two
charges, and their consensus amounts to a binding proof. In addition,
k/iarãj is imposed on land that has been conquered through the mobil-
isation of the armies and the use of force, while 'ushr is imposed on
land whose residents submitted voluntarily. The two attributes cannot be
combined in the same land. The cause of the two claims is one and that is
productive land, except that it is assessed in the case of 'ushr through ver-
ification (of the actual produce), while in the case of kharãj on the basis
of (annual) estimation. It is for this reason that both are linked with the
land. The same disagreement governs the charging of zakãt with one of
these charges.'°
Kharäj does not recur due to the recurrence of produce during a year.
The reason is that 'Umar (God be pleased with him) did not impose it as
a recurring charge as distinguished from 'ushr. The reason is that 'ushr
cannot be determined except by its obligation on each (seasonal) pro-
duce. Allah knows what is correct.
8ft is recorded by al-Bayhaqi. A1-Zayla'i, vol. 3, 441.
91t is recorded by Ibn 'Adi in al-Kãmil. A1-Zayla'i, vol. 3, 442.
'°Like a person buying 'ushr land for purposes of trade.

--- Page 1050 ---

334(cid:9) Al-Hidayah(cid:9) BOOK XIII: SIYAR

--- Page 1051 ---

Chapter
115
Jizyah (Poll Tax)
Jizyah is of two kinds: First is jizyah that is imposed by consent and
negotiation and it is determined according to the agreement that takes
place, just like the Messenger of Allah (God bless him and grant him
peace) made a treaty with the people of Najrãn for the payment of twelve
hundred hullah (dresses).' As the reason is consent, therefore, it is not
permitted to transfer it to something other than what is agreed upon.
The second type is jizyah that the imam initiates and he imposes it when
he defeats the enemy and keeps the residents settled on their property.
He imposes on one who is apparently rich forty-eight dirhams per year
by taking four dirhams from him every month. On a person of aver-
age means a sum of twenty-four dirhams is imposed taking two dirhams
every month. On a poor person who is capable of working a sum of
twelve dirhams is imposed taking one dirham every month. This is so
in our view. Al-Shãfi'i (God bless him) said that on each major person
one dinar or what is equivalent is imposed, and the rich and poor are
the same for this purpose. This is based upon the words of the Prophet
(God bless him and grant him peace) to Mu'ãdh (God be pleased with
him), "Take from each male and female who has attained puberty a dinar
or its equivalent in ma'afir (cloth in Yemen)."' This tradition does not
provide any detail (for making a distinction). The reason is that jizyah is
imposed in place of death so that it is not imposed on one whose slay-
ing is not permitted due to unbelief, like minor children and women.
This meaning includes both rich and poor (males). Our view is transmit-
ted from 'Umar, 'Uthmãn and 'All (God be pleased with them). No one
'It is recorded by Abü DawUd in Kitãb al-Kharãj. A1-Zayla'i, vol. 3, 445.
1t is recorded by Abü Dãwtid, al-Tirmidhi and al-Nasã'i. Al-Zayla'i, vol. 3, 445.
2
335

--- Page 1052 ---

336(cid:9) Al-Hidiyah(cid:9) BOOK XIII: SIYAR
among the Muhãjirün or the Ansãr opposed them in this. Further, it is
imposed to support the fighters, therefore, it is to be imposed according
to a graded scale in the same manner as kharãj on land. This is so as as it
is made obligatory in place of help in terms of life and wealth, and such
help (from the warriors) varies too with respect to what is contributed,
being more or less, likewise what is its substitute (contribution through
jizyah ). What he (al-Shãfi'I) has related is interpreted so as to apply to
imposition after negotiation. It is for this reason that he ordered him to
take it from a major female as well even though jizyah is not taken from
her.
He said: jizyah is imposed on the People of the Book and the
Magians, due to the words of the Exalted, "from among the People of the
Book, until they pay the Jizya with willing submission, and feel them-
selves subdued."' The Prophet (God bless him and grant him peace)
imposed jizyah on the Magians.4
He said: And on the non-Arab idol worshippers. A1-Shãfi'i (God bless
him) disagrees with this. He says that fighting them is obligatory due to
the words of the Exalted, "And fight them on until there is no more perse-
cution or oppression, and the religion becomes Allah's. But if they cease,
let there be no hostility except to those who practice oppression."' We
have identified (he says) the permissibility of relinquishing fighting in
the case of the People of the Book through the Qur'an, and in the case of
the Magians through the tradition, and those who remain besides them
are governed by the original rule. We argue that as enslaving them is per-
mitted, therefore, imposition ofjizyah is also permitted, because each one
of these includes the meaning of taking away their personality (person)
from them. Thus, such a person earns and pays the Muslims, while his
own support is through his personal earning.
If he conquers their territory prior to this (imposition), then their
men and women are booty, due to the permissibility of their enslavement.
Jizyah is not to be imposed on Arab idol worshippers nor on the
apostates, because their unbelief is of an extreme nature. As for the Arab
polytheists, the reason is that the Prophet (God bless him and grant him
peace) grew up among them and the Qur'an was sent in their language,
3Qur'än 9: 29
4lhere are several traditions on this and among them is one recorded by al-Bukhari
in his Sahih. Al-Zayla'i, vol. 3, 448.
5Qur'ãn 2:193

--- Page 1053 ---

t
BOOK XIII: SIYAR(cid:9) Al-Hidãyah(cid:9) 337
therefore, the miracle is clearly manifest in their case. The apostate, on
the other hand, has denied his Lord, after he was guided to Islam and
came to know of its merits.
There is no jizyah on women or minors, because it is imposed as a
substitute for execution or a substitute for combat, and they are neither
slain nor do they participate in combat due to the lack of legal capacity.
He said: And there is no jizyah on the invalid nor on the blind. Like-
wise the paralysed person and the enfeebled old man, on the basis of
what we have elaborated. According to Abü Yüsuf (God bless him) it is
imposed if he has wealth, for he then fights in its broad meaning if he
is consulted. There is also no jizyah on the poor man who is not able
to work. A1-Shãfi'i (God bless him) disagrees with this. He relies on the
unqualified meaning of the tradition of Mu'ãdh (God be pleased with
him).' We rely on the report that 'Uthmãn (God be pleased with him) did
not impose it on the poor man who was unable to work,7 and this took
place in the presence of the Companions (God be pleased with them).
The reason is that khardj is not imposed on land that is unable to pro-
duce. Likewise this kharãj. The tradition gives the probable meaning of
one who can work.
It is not imposed on the owned slave, the mukãtab slave, the mudab-
bar slave or on the umm al-walad, because it is imposed as a substitute
for slaying with respect to them and is a means of support for us, and
on the second consideration it is not to be imposed (for they have no
wealth), therefore, it is not imposed due to the doubt inherent in it. Their
owners are not pay on their behalf, because they will be bearing addi-
tional jizyah on their account.
It is not to be imposed on monks who do not mingle with the people.
This is how it is mentioned here, while Muhammad (God bless him),
narrating from AbU Hanifah (God bless him), has stated that it is to be
imposed on them if they are able to work, and this is also the opinion
of Abü Yüsuf (God bless him). The underlying reasoning for imposing it
on them is that the ability to work has been wasted by the monk and he
has become like khardj land whose cultivation has been suspended. The
reasoning for not imposing it on them is that they are not to be slain when
they do not mix up with the people, while jizyah with respect to them is a
'See preceding notes.
7By this he means 'Uthmãn ibn 1-lunayf (God be pleased with him). It is recorded by
Ibn Zanjawiyyah in kitab al-Amwal. A1-Zayla'i, vol. 3, 453.

--- Page 1054 ---

338(cid:9) Al-Hidyah(cid:9) BOOK XIII: SIYAR
substitute for killing. It is essential for a person who is considered capable
of work that he be in sound health, and it is sufficient that he enjoy sound
health for a major part of the year.
If a person embraces Islam when he owes jizyah, the claim against
him is extinguished. Likewise if he dies in a state of unbelief, with al-
Shãfi'i (God bless him) disagreeing with this. He maintains that it is
imposed as a substitute for (the guarantee of) protection or for residence.
As this benefit has reached him, the compensation should not be extin-
guished due to this obstacle, as in the case of wages and the (amount
due on account of) negotiated settlement for intentional homicide. We
rely on the words of the Prophet (God bless him and grant him peace),
"There is no liability of jizyah on a Muslim."' The reason is that it is
imposed as a penalty for unbelief, and it is for this reason that it has been
called jizyah for compensation (reward) and jizyah have the same mean-
ing. The penalty for unbelief is extinguished due to Islam. Further, it is
not awarded after death, because the laying down of a punishment in this
world is only for the repelling of the mischief, and this mischief stands
repelled due to death and by the acceptance of Islam. In addition to this,
it has been made obligatory as a substitute for support with respect to
us, and such help he provides through his own person after acceptance
of Islam. Protection, on the other hand, is established for he is a human
being, and the Dhimmi resides on his own property, therefore, imposing
it as a substitute for protection or residence has no meaning.
If the claim of two years comes to be combined, the two are merged
into one. In al-Jami' al-S aghir it is stated that a person from whom the
per head kharäj is not taken up to the passage of one year, and the next
year arrives, it is not to be taken. This is the view according to Abü
Hanifah (God bless him). AbU Yüsuf (God bless him) said that it is to
be taken, which is also the opinion of al-Shafi'i (God bless him).
If he dies upon the completion of the year, it is not to be taken from
him according to their unanimous view. Likewise if he dies during the
year. As for the issue of death, we have already mentioned it. It is said
that the kharãj on land is also governed by this disagreement. It is also
said that two claims cannot be merged into one (in the case of land). The
two jurists arguing about the disputed issue say that Kharãj is imposed
as a counter-value and counter-values when they come together, when
8ft is recorded by AbU DãwUd. Al-Zayla'i, vol. 3, 453.

--- Page 1055 ---

B00KXIII:SIYAR(cid:9) Al-Hidãyah(cid:9) 339
they can be recovered, are recovered. In the case that we are discussing
it is possible to make recovery after the coming together of (the claims
for) two years as distinguished from his conversion to Islam for then the
recovery is not possible.
Abü Hanifah (God bless him) argues that it has been imposed as a
penalty for insisting on remaining an unbeliever, as we have explained. It
is for this reason that it is not accepted from him if he sends it through his
deputy, according to the most authentic narration, rather he is obliged to
come in person and pay it while standing when the one taking from him
is seated. Further, they are imposed as a substitute for execution from
their perspective and as financial support from our perspective, as we
have mentioned, but for purposes of the future and not for the past. The
reason is that killing is due for battles taking place now and not for those
that took place in the past. Likewise support is for the future, because the
past is no longer in need of it. Thereafter, the statement of Muhammad
(God bless him) in al-Jami' al-Saghir, "and the next year arrives' is con-
strued by some jurists (Mashã'ikh, God bless them) to mean the past in
the figurative sense. They said that the obligation is to be met by the end
of the year, therefore, it is necessary for it to be in the past so that the
coming together of the two claims is realised and they can be merged.
According to some, it is to be applied to the actual meaning. The obliga-
tion according to AbU Hanifah (God bless him) arises at the beginning of
the year, therefore, the coming together is realised by the mere passing of
the year. The correct position is that the obligation, in our view, arises at
the beginning of the year, while according to al-Shãfi'i (God bless him) it
arises towards the end of the year on the analogy of zakãt. We maintain
that what it is made a substitute for is not realised except in the future,
as we have determined, therefore, it becomes difficult to impose it after
the passage of the year and we have imposed it from its beginning. Allah
knows what is correct.
115.1 RIGHTS AND DUTIES OF THE DHIMMIS
It is not permitted to construct new synagogues and churches within the
dãr al-Islam, due to the words of the Prophet (God bless him and grant

--- Page 1056 ---

340(cid:9) Al-Hidayah(cid:9) BOOK XIII: SIYAR
him peace), "There is no castration in Islam nor a church." The meaning
here is construction afresh.9
If the old synagogues and churches are demolished they may recon-
struct them. The reason is that buildings do not last forever. As the imam
has let them settle in the land, he has given them an assurance to rebuild
them, except that they are not allowed to move them (to another loca-
tion) as that amounts to new construction in reality. The monks cell
meant for seclusion is like the synagogue as distinguished from the place
of prayer within a house as that is subservient to residence. This is the
case in cities and not in villages, because it is the cities in which the sym-
bols of rites are established and are not to be confronted through the
expression of what goes against them. It is said in our lands that they are
to be prevented from constructing them in villages too for there too are
some symbols of rites. This view is related from the founder of the school
(Abü Hanifah) about the villages of Kufah, for the majority of the resi-
dents were Dhimmis. In the Arab lands, it is said, that this is forbidden
in the cities as well as the villages, due to the words of the Prophet (God
bless him and grant him peace), "Two dins cannot come together in the
Arabian peninsula.""
If a Dhimmi refuses to pay the jizyah, kills a Muslim, uses foul lan-
guage for the Prophet (God bless him and grant him peace), or has
unlawful intercourse with a Muslim woman, his compact is not to be
terminated. The reason is that the end result of fighting is the imposition
of jizyah not its actual payment, and the obligation persists. Al-Shãfi'i
(God bless him) said that using foul language for the Prophet (God bless
him and grant him peace) amounts to a breach of his compact, for the
reason that had he been a Muslim his faith would be annulled, likewise
his assurance of safe-conduct is annulled for the compact of Dhimmah is
a substitute for belief. We argue that using bad language for the Prophet
(God bless him and grant him peace) is an expression of unbelief on his
part and the unbelief associated with him does not prevent his compact,
and the recurring unbelief does not remove the assurance.
His compact is not terminated unless he moves over to the där a!-
harb or the enemy subdue a territory and they wage war against us. The
reason is that in this case they have become our warring enemies and the
91t is recorded by al-Bayhaqi in his Sunan. A1-Zayla'i, vol. 3, 453.
"It is recorded by Ishaq ibn Rahwayh in his Musnad. A1-Zayla'i, vol. 3, 453.

--- Page 1057 ---

BOOK XIII: SIYAR(cid:9) Al-Hidãyah(cid:9) 341
compact of dhimmah has become devoid of utility, which is repelling the
mischief of the enemy. Allah knows what is correct.
115.2 CHRISTIANS OF BANU TAGHLIB
The Christians of BanU Taghlib are required to pay on their wealth twice
the amount of zakat that the Muslims are required to pay, because 'Umar
(God be pleased with him) made a settlement with them for this in the
presence of the Companions (God be pleased with them)." This amount
is required to be paid by their women, but not their minor children. The
reason is that the settlement was made for double of the zakãt and such
a payment is obligatory for women, but not minors, so also in the case
of double payment. Zufar (God bless him) said that it is not to be taken
from their women either, which is also the opinion of al-Shafi'i (God bless
him). The reason is that in reality it is jizyah as was stated by 'Umar (God
be pleased with him), "This is jizyah, so divide it up as you like."" It is for
this reason that it is spent on the avenues specific to jizyah, and there is
no jizyah for women. Our argument is that it is wealth that has become
due through a settlement and a woman is eligible for the imposition of
such a liability on her. The avenues are the interests of Muslims, because
it is wealth that belongs to the treasury and this wealth is not linked with
jizyah. Do you not see that the conditions of jizyah are not observed for
it.
The (Muslim) client (mawla) of a Taghlibi (freedman) is required to
pay the kharäj, that is, jizyah, while the kharãj on land has the status of
the mawla of a Qurashi (where it is not taken). Zufar (God bless him)
said that it is to be doubled, due to the words of the Prophet (God bless
him and grant him peace), "The mawla of a people is one of them. Do
"11
you not see that the mawlã of a Hashimi is linked to him for purposes
of the prohibition of zakat. Our argument is that this (taking double) is
a kind of leniency (as compared to jizyah for there is no accompanying
humiliation), and the mawla is not essentially linked to such leniency.
Accordingly, jizyah is imposed on the client of a Muslim when he is a
"This has preceded towards the end of the section on zakat on horses. It is recorded
by al-Bayhaqi in a lengthy tradition. Al-Zayla'i, vol. 2, 362.
'21t is in the tradition above.
13This has preceded in the chapter on who is entitled to zakat and who is not. Al-
Zayla'i, vol. 3, 455.

--- Page 1058 ---

342(cid:9) Al-Hidayah(cid:9) BOOK XIII: SIYAR
Christian as distinguished from the prohibition of sadaqah, because pro-
hibitions are established by doubt, therefore, the client is associated with
the Hãshimi with respect to it (that is, for prohibition of sadaqah). (If the
question is raised: what about the client of the rich man? we say:) This is
not binding in the case of the client of a rich freedman insofar as zakãt is
not prohibited for the rich, for the rich man is entitled to take from zakãt
(especially if he is one of the collectors). Affluence prevents it, but it is
not found in the case of the client. As for the Hãshimi, he is not entitled
to this support at all for he is protected due to his nobility and honour
from the filth of the people, therefore, his client stands linked to him.
He said: What the imam collects from kharj, from the wealth of the
BanU Taghlib, from what is paid as a tribute to the imam by the enemy,
and from jizyah is to spent for the welfare of the Muslims like forti-
fications for defence, arched bridges, and embankments. He also gives
from this to the Muslim judges, officials and jurists what is sufficient for
their subsistence. In addition to this, he pays from this for the rations of
the fighters and their families. The reason is that it is the wealth of the
treasury, and it has reached the Muslims without fighting, therefore, it is
meant for the welfare of the Muslims, and these persons are their officials.
The allowances of the children are the liability of their fathers. If he does
not pay what is sufficient for them, they would be in need of earning and
would not be free for engaging in battles.
If a person dies during the middle of a year, he has no share from the
grant, because it is a type of support and is not a debt. It is for this reason
that it has been called 'ata' (grant). Thus, it cannot be owned prior to
its being taken into possession; and it is extinguished upon death. Those
entitled to the grant ('atã') in our times are like the qadi, the teacher and
the mufti. Allah knows best.

--- Page 1059 ---

Chapter
116
Rebels (Bughat)
When a group of Muslims take control of a land and move out of obedi-
ence to the imam, he is to invite them to return to the main community
and is to remove the doubts that they have. The reason is that 'All (God
be pleased with him) did in the case of the people of Harürã' before
engaging them in battle.' The reason is that this is the easier of the two
choices and, perhaps, the mischief will be repelled through this, therefore,
he begins with it.
He is not to commence hostilities until they start them. If they com-
mence hostilities, he is to engage them till the dispersal of their group.
This feeble servant (Author) says: This is how al-QudUri (God bless him)
has stated it in his Mukhtasar. The Imãm known as Khuwãhar'zadah
(God bless him) has mentioned that in our view it is permissible to
engage them in battle if they arm themselves and gather for hostilities.
A1-Shãfi'l (God bless him) said that it is not permitted to engage them in
battle till they actually commence hostilities, because it is not permitted
to kill a Muslim, except in defence, and these people are Muslims. This is
distinguished from the case of unbelievers for their unbelief itself is a per-
mitting factor, in his view. We rely on the argument that the rule revolves
around the evidence, which is their gathering together and assuming mil-
itary strength. The reason is that if the imäm waits for long for their actual
attack, it is possible that he may not be able to defend, therefore, he relies
on the evidence due to the necessity of repelling their mischief. If the
report reaches him that they have taken up arms and are poised for bat-
tle, it is necessary for him to capture them and to imprison them till they
give up their resistance and to offer repentance. This is for repelling their
'It is recorded by al-Nasã'i in al-Sunan al-Ku bra. A1-Zayla'i, vol. 3, 461.
343

--- Page 1060 ---

344(cid:9) Al-Hidãyah(cid:9) BOOK XIII: SIYAR
mischief as far as possible. The narration from Abfl Hanifah (God bless
him) about staying in the houses (during such resistance) is construed
to mean the situation when there is no imam. When there exists a lawful
ruler it is obligatory to assist him if one has the means and the ability to
do so.
If they have a group supporting them, then their wounded are to
be slain and those retreating are to be pursued, in order to repel their
mischief and so that they do not join up with their group.
If they do not have a group supporting them, their wounded are not
to be slain nor are those retreating to be pursued, because the mischief
has been repelled without this. A1-Shãfi'i (God bless him) said that this
is not permitted in both cases, because when they give up fighting their
slaying is no longer in defence. The response to him is what we mentioned
that what is taken into account is the evidence (of their ability to attack)
and not its having taken place in reality.
Their families will not be enslaved nor will their wealth be (taken
as spoils and) divided up. This is based on the saying of 'All (God be
pleased with him) during the Battle of Jamal: "No prisoner will be slain,
the privacy of families will not be violated and wealth will not be taken."2
This is treated as a model in such cases. He is statement in about prisoners
is construed to mean "when they do not have a supporting group." If
there is such a supporting group, the imam is to execute the prisoner, but
if he likes he can imprison him, due to what we have said, for these people
are Muslims and Islam grants protection to life and wealth.
There is no harm if the Muslims use their weapons in combat, if they
are in need of doing so. Al-Shãfi'i (God bless him) said that it is not per-
mitted. The same disagreement applies to using their riding animals. He
maintains that it is wealth of a Muslim, therefore, utilising it without his
consent is not permitted. We reply on the report that 'All (God be pleased
with him) divided the weapons among his companions at Basrah, and it
was a division due to need not for ownership. Further, the imam has a
right to do so in the case of wealth owned by those supporting him, there-
fore, doing so in the wealth of rebels has higher approval. The underlying
meaning is the bearing of a smaller injury to ward off a more grievous
injury.
21t is recorded by Ibn Abi Shaybah. Al-Zayla'i, vol. 3, 463.

--- Page 1061 ---

BOOK XIII: SIYAR(cid:9) A1-Hidãyah(cid:9) 345
The imam is to take their wealth into custody, and is not to return it
until they repent. If they do repent he is to return it to them. As for not
dividing it up, we have already elaborated it. In the case of custody, it is
done to ward off their mischief by weakening their power, therefore, he
takes it into custody away from them even if he is not in need of it. He is,
however, to sell the riding animals as preserving the price is more rational
and easier. As for returning the wealth after their repentance, the reason
is that the necessity is over and their is no demand to convert them into
spoils.
What the rebels have collected by way of kharäj and 'ushr, from the
lands that that they came to control, is not to be collected a second time
by the imam. The reason is that the authority of the imam to collect is
based upon the protection he accords to the residents, and he was not
able to protect them.
If they spent the collected amount on lawful avenues, the person
from whom it was collected stands rewarded, because the right of the
beneficiary has reached him, but if they did not spend it on the rightful
avenue, then the matter for the residents is between them and Allah with
respect to its repayment, because what is due has not reached the rightful
beneficiaries. This humble servant (Author) says: They (the Mashã'ikh)
said that there is no repayment for them in the case of kharãj, because
those who took them were warriors, even if they were rich. In the case
of 'ushr (there is no repetition) if they were poor, because it is the right
of the poor. We have elaborated this in the topic of Zakãt. In the future,
the imam will take the dues as he is protecting them due to his regaining
control and authority.
If a person kills another, and both were from the military force of the
rebels, after which their area is conquered, then they (the killer) is not
liable for anything. The reason is that the lawful imam had no authority
over them at the time of the homicide, therefore, it did not give rise to
liability, as in the case of homicide in the dãr al-/-zarb.
If they take control of a city and a resident of the city intentionally
kills another resident of the city, and thereafter the city is conquered,
qisds is to be extracted from the killer. The interpretation is that when
they did not implement their own laws on the residents and were dis-
lodged before they could do that. In such a case, the authority of the
imam is not severed, therefore, retaliation is obligatory.

--- Page 1062 ---

346(cid:9) A1-Hidayah(cid:9) BOOK XIII: SIYAR
If a person from among the Ahi al-'Adl (those in lawful authority)
kills a rebel, he will inherit from him. If the rebel kills him and says, "I
believed I was on the lawful side, but I am now on the lawful side," he
inherits from him. If he says, "I killed him knowing that I was on the
unlawful side," he will not inherit from him. This is the position accord-
ing to AbU Hanifah and Muhammad (God bless them). Abü Yüsuf (God
bless him) said that the rebel will not inherit in either case. This is also
al-Shãfi'i's opinion. The basis is that the 'ãdil, if he kills a rebel or destroys
his wealth, he does not compensate nor has he committed a sin, because
he is commanded to fight them to repel their mischief. If the rebel kills
an 'ãdil, he is not liable in our view, but he does commit a sin. A1-Shãfi'i
in an earlier opinion said that he is liable for compensation. On the same
disagreement if an apostate repents, when he has destroyed life or wealth,
he (al-Shãfi'i) maintains that he has destroyed protected wealth or he has
killed a protected person, therefore, he is to compensate, on the analogy
of the position prior to the use of force. We rely on the consensus (ijmã')
of the Companions (God be pleased with them) that has been reported by
al-Zuhri. Further, he has killed on the basis ofafasid evidence, and such
an evidence is linked with one that is valid when it is supported by the use
of force as an evidence of defence, just like the use of force in the case of
the enemy and its justification. The absence of compensation is due to the
fact that the rules (in this world) are based upon obligations and duties,
and there is no duty due to the existence of permissibility on the basis of
justification. There is also no obligation due to the absence of authority
and the existence of hostilities, however, authority remains prior to hos-
tilities, and in the absence of a justification obligation is established as a
matter of belief, as distinguished from sin, because hostilities do not affect
the right of the Lawgiver. When this is established, we say that the killing
of a rebel by an 'ãdil is justifiable homicide, therefore, it does not pre-
vent inheritance. According to AbU Yüsuf (God bless him) in the case of
killing of an 'ãdil by a rebel the irregular justification is acknowledged for
purposes of repelling mischief, while the need here is to establish entitle-
ment to inheritance, therefore, the justification cannot be acknowledged
with respect to inheritance. The two jurists argue in this that there is a
need for doing away with prevention of inheritance, because being a near
relative is the cause of inheritance, therefore, an irregular evidence will
be acknowledged for this purpose. The condition here, however, will be
that it is based on his morality. Thus, if he were to say, "I knew that I was

--- Page 1063 ---

BOOK XIII: SIYAR(cid:9) Al-Hidayah(cid:9) 347
on the unlawful side' the repelling of prevention will not be found and
compensation will be due.
He said: It is disapproved to sell weapons to those who do mischief
or to their military contingents, because it amounts to supporting dis-
obedience. There is no harm in selling at Kufah to the residents of Kufah
when the person selling does not know them to belong to the group of
rebels. The reason is that domination in the cities is of the law-abiding
people. Thereafter, it is disapproved to sell the weapons alone and not
those things that are not used for fighting, but are in the manufacture.
Do you not see that it is disapproved to sell musical instruments and
not the wood. The same is relationship between wine and grapes. Allah
knows what is correct.

--- Page 1064 ---

348(cid:9) Al-Hidayah(cid:9) BOOK XIII: SIYAR

--- Page 1065 ---

Al- Hidãyah
BOOK FOURTEEN
Laqit
(Foundling)
Ch. n: The Legal Status of the Foundling(cid:9) 351
Ch. 118: Managing the Affairs of the Foundling(cid:9)
355

--- Page 1066 ---

350(cid:9) Al-Hidayah(cid:9) BOOK XIV: FOUNDLING

--- Page 1067 ---

Chapter
117
The Legal Status of the Foundling
The term laqit (foundling) is used keeping in view its future insofar as it
is taken into custody. Picking up (taking into custody) is recommended
as in this there is the survival of the child. If the person is convinced that
the child will die, taking into custody is obligatory.
He said: The foundling is a free person. The original rule for a human
being is freedom. Likewise, the dãr al-Islam is the dãr of free persons, and
the rule assigned is that for the majority.
The maintenance of the foundling is the responsibility of the bayt
al-miil (treasury). It is related from 'Umar and 'All (God be pleased with
them). The reason is that the foundling is a Muslim, who is unable to earn
and has no wealth, nor does he has close relatives. Thus, he resembles
a cripple (invalid) who has no wealth or relatives. Further, the treasury
inherits his estate, therefore, al-kharãj bi'-d-damãn (earning is based on
the liability to bear loss or to give compensation), for which reason com-
pensation for his offences is also the liability of the treasury. The person
taking the foundling into custody is deemed to make a voluntary dona-
tion by spending on the foundling due to the absence of wilãyah, unless
he is ordered by the qadi to do so that it becomes a debt against the
foundling due to the general authority of the qadi.
He said: If a person takes the foundling into custody then no other
person has the right to take the child away from him, because his right
comes to be established due to his prior possession.
If a claimant claims that the foundling is his child, then his statement
is to be accepted, and this means when the person taking custody has not
claimed paternity of the child. This is based upon istihsãn, while anilogy
351

--- Page 1068 ---

352(cid:9) Al-Hidayah(cid:9) BOOK XIV: FOUNDLING
dictates that his statement is not admissible, because it amounts to negat-
ing the right of the person taking custody. The basis of istislsn is that it
is an acknowledgement that will be of benefit for the minor, because the
foundling will gain respect through paternity and will be dishonoured
in its absence. Thereafter, it is said that the claim is valid with respect to
paternity, but not for negating the custody of the person who found him.
It is also said that negation of custody is based upon the success of his
claim of paternity. If the person who has taken custody claims paternity,
it is said that it is valid both by way of istihsãn as well as qiyãs. The correct
view, however, is that it is based upon the difference between qiyãs and
istihsãn (as mentioned), and its rule was known in Kitãb al-Asi.
If two persons claim him and one of them points to a mark of iden-
tification on his body, he is to be given preference. The reason is that
the apparent facts support his claim due to the conformity of the mark
of identification with his statement. If none of them describes a mark of
identification, then he is considered the child of both due to their equal-
ity in terms of the cause. If, however, the claim of one of them was prior,
the foundling will be considered his child, as his claim was undisputed at
that time, unless the other person comes up with testimony for testimony
is stronger (in terms of proof).
If a child is found in one of the cities of the Muslims or in one of
their villages and a Dhimmi claims it to be his son, the paternity of the
child is assigned to him, but the child is a Muslim. This is based upon
istihsãn, because his claim includes paternity, which is beneficial for the
minor, while negation of Islam is established through the dãr (territory)
and this is harmful for the child. Consequently, his claim is allowed in
what is beneficial for the child and disallowed in what is harmful for him.
If a child is found in one of the villages of the People of the
Dhimmah, or in a synagogue or a church, then he is deemed to be a
DhimmI. This is the unanimous response when the person who finds
him is a Dhimmi. When the person finding him in such a location is a
Muslim or is a Dhimmi finding him in the locations specific to the Mus-
lims, then the narrations vary. In the book of the Laqit, the location has
been given precedence as that comes first, while in the Book of Da'wã, in
some manuscripts, the finder is given precedence. This is a narration of
Ibn Samã'ah from Muhammad (God bless him) based upon the strength
of possession. Do you not see that status is determined on the basis of
the dãr, thus, if one of them was taken captive along with the minor, the

--- Page 1069 ---

BOOK XIV: FOUNDLING(cid:9) Al-Hidayah(cid:9) 353
minor would be considered an unbeliever. In some manuscripts Islam
has been given precedence due to the welfare of the child.
If a person claims that the foundling is his slave, his claim is not
admitted, because the foundling is prima facie a free person, unless he
is able to adduce evidence (testimony) that he is his slave.
If a person claims that the foundling is his child, his paternity is
attributed to him, because this benefits the child, and the child is free.
The reason is that the slave can have a child from a freewoman, therefore,
apparent freedom will not be annulled on the basis of doubt.
The freeman in his claim for the child is given precedence over the
slave, while the Muslim is given precedence over a Dhimmi, by giving
preference to what is best for the welfare of the child.

--- Page 1070 ---

354(cid:9) Al-Hidayah(cid:9) BOOK XIV: FOUNDLING

--- Page 1071 ---

Chapter
118
Managing the Affairs of the Foundling
If some wealth is found on the person of the foundling, tied to him, then
it belongs to the foundling, on the basis of the obvious conclusion. Like-
wise, if this wealth is tied to his riding animal when he is riding it, due
what we have mentioned. Thereafter, the finder is to spend it on him
according to the orders of the qãdi. The reason is that it is found wealth
and it is the qadi who has the authority to spend such wealth. It is said
that he may spend it without the directive of the qãdi, because it obvi-
ously belongs to the foundling. He has the authority spend on, and to
buy, things that are necessary for the foundling, like food and clothing
as they are part of expenditure.
The person finding the child does not have the authority to marry
her, due to the absence of the basis of such authority based on kinship,
ownership or judicial authority.
The finder does not have the authority to undertake transactions in
the wealth of the foundling, on the analogy of the mother. The reason
is that the authority to undertake transactions is for the growth of such
wealth, and this is established on the basis of perfect managerial judge-
ment and abundant affection for the child, and each one of them (mother
and finder) possesses one of these traits.
He said: It is permitted to him to accept a gift on behalf of the
foundling, because that carries pure benefit. It is for this reason that the
minor possesses such authority on his own when he possesses discretion.
This authority is also possessed by the mother and the guardian.
He said: It is permitted to him to hand him over for apprenticeship
in a trade, because this is for training him and for ensuring his survival.
355

--- Page 1072 ---

356(cid:9) Al-Hidyah(cid:9)
BOOK XIV: FOUNDLING
He said: He may also offer his services for hire. This feeble servant
says: This is the narration of al-QudUri (God bless him) in his Mukhtasar.
It is stated in al-Jami' al-Saghir that he is not to offer his services for hire.
It is mentioned in the disapproved acts, and this is the correct view. The
reasoning for the first view is that it pertains to his training. The reason-
ing underlying the second view is that he does not possess the authority
to destroy his benefits, and in this the finder resembles the uncle and not
the mother, because she possesses this authority, as we will be mentioning
in the chapter of disapproved things. Allah knows what is correct.

--- Page 1073 ---

Al- Hidãyah
BOOK FIFTEEN
Luqtah
(Found Property
Ch. ii: The Legal Status of Found Property(cid:9)
359
Ch. 120: Claims on Found Property and its Identification(cid:9) 361

--- Page 1074 ---

358(cid:9) Al-Hidayah(cid:9) BOOK XV: FOUND PROPERTY

--- Page 1075 ---

Chapter
119
The Legal Status of Found Property
He said: Found property is a trust (amãnah) when the finder takes wit-
nesses that he is acquiring it to preserve it and that he will return it to the
rightful owner. The reason is that taking possession of property in this
way (in the presence of witnesses) is permitted according to the shari'ah;
in fact, it is preferred according to the jurists generally. It is obligatory
when there is fear of loss, according to what the jurists said. When this
is the rule it is not liable to compensation. Likewise if the owner and the
finder confirm that he took possession on behalf of the owner, because
their confirmation is proof in their favour and becomes like testimony.
If he acknowledges that he took possession for himself, he is liable on
the basis of consensus (ijmã'), because he acquired the wealth of another
without his permission, and also without the permission of the shari'ah.
If witnesses do witness the act of taking and he says, "I took possession
on behalf of the owner' but the owner rejects his claim, he is to compen-
sate the property, according to Abü Hanifah and Muhammad (God bless
them). AbU YUsuf (God bless him) says that he is not to compensate the
loss, and his statement will be given preference, because the act of taking
prima facie supports him, because he preferred the fear of Allah in doing
good to the commission of sin.
The two jurists argue that he acknowledged bringing about the cause
of compensation, which is the taking of the wealth of another and claimed
what is meant to absolve him of liability, that is, taking on behalf of the
owner, but in this doubt has occurred, therefore, he is not absolved of
liability. What he (Abü YUsuf) mentions about the prima facie position is
opposed by another similar position, because it is obvious that the person
undertaking the transaction was acting on his on account. It is sufficient
359

--- Page 1076 ---

360(cid:9) A1-Hidayah(cid:9)
BOOK XV: FOUND PROPERTY
in the taking of witnesses to say, "If you hear a person calling out for
lost property, then you are to guide him to mc?' This is the rule whether
the found property consists of a single item or many, because luqtah is a
generic term.

--- Page 1077 ---

Chapter
120
Claims on Found Property and its Identification
He said: If the found property is worth less than ten dirhams then he is
to keep it available for identification for several days, but if it is valued
at ten dirhams or more he is to make it available for identification for a
whole year. This feeble servant (Author) says: This is the narration from
Abü Hanifah (God bless him). His words, "several days," mean in accor-
dance with what he considers appropriate. Muhammad (God bless him)
determined it in Kitãb al-Asl to be one year without giving details about
the value being less or more. This is also the opinion of Mãlik and al-
Shãfi'i (God bless them), due to the words of the Prophet (God bless him
and grant him peace), "If someone finds property he is to have it identi-
fied for a year" and there is no detail in this. The reasoning for the first
view is that the determination of one year was laid down about found
property that was valued at one hundred dinars, which is equivalent to
one thousand dirhams. Ten dirhams and what is more than this comes
within the meaning of one thousand insofar as it is relevant for ampu-
tation of the hand and the legalisation of marriage. In terms of zakat,
however, ten dirhams do not fall within the meaning of a thousand. Con-
sequently, we have made identification obligatory for a year by way of
precaution. 'What is less than ten does not fall within the meaning of one
thousand in any way, therefore, we have left it to the discretion of the
person facing the situation. It is said that none of these estimations are
binding and the matter is to be left to the discretion of the finder, and
he is to have it identified till he is convinced that the owner is no longer
looking for it. Thereafter, he is to give it away as charity. If the found
'There are several traditions in this recorded by al-Där'qutni and others. A1-Zayla'i,
vol. 3, 466.
361

--- Page 1078 ---

362(cid:9) Al-Hidayah(cid:9) BOOK XV: FOUND PROPERTY
thing is something perishable, he is to have it identified till he fears that
it will perish, then he is to give it away as charity. It is necessary to have
the property identified at the location where he found it and in the main
mosque, as that is more likely to ensure that it will reach its owner. If the
found property is something that the owner will certainly not look for
like date-stones or pomegranate seeds, then it is permitted to cast them
aside and to utilise them without identification, however, such things will
stay in the ownership of the owner as it is not lawful to make an unknown
person the owner.
He said: If the owner comes (he is to deliver it to him) otherwise he is
to give it away as charity, so that the right reaches the one who is entitled
to it, which is obligatory as far as it is possible. This takes place by delivery
of the corpus of the property when the owner if found, or the delivery of
the counter-value, which is correct taking into account the ratification of
the of the charitable donation by the owner. He may, however, hold on to
the property in the hope of finding its owner.
He said: If the owner turns up, that is, after the finder has made a
charitable donation, then he has the option to allow the donation to
be implemented, for which he will be rewarded, because the donation
even though it was undertaken with the permission of the shar' (law)
it was not undertaken with his permission and is suspended subject to
his ratification. The ownership for the poor donee is established prior
to such ratification, therefore, the ratification does not depend upon the
existence of the subject-matter. This is different from sale by the unau-
thorised agent (fuduli), which is established only after ratification of the
sale. If he likes he may hold the finder liable, because he delivered his
wealth to another without his permission, except that this was done due
to permissibility from the law (shar'). Such permission, however, does
not negate the claiming of compensation as a right by the subject, just
like the consumption of the wealth of another in a state of duress. If he
likes he may hold the poor person liable for compensation if the property
is destroyed in his hands, because he took possession of his wealth with-
out his permission. If the property exists, he may take it as he has found
his property with its corpus intact.
He said: It is permitted to take possession of goats, cows and camels
as found property. Mãlik and al-Shãfi'i (God bless them) said that when
camels and cows are found in the wilderness, it is better to leave them
alone. The same disagreement governs horses as well. These two jurists

--- Page 1079 ---

BOOK XV: FOUND PROPERTY(cid:9) Al-Hidyah(cid:9) 363
argue that the original rule about the taking of another's property is pro-
hibition, while permissibility is due the fear of loss. When the property
is equipped with that with which it can defend itself such loss is rare,
but there is a possibility of loss, therefore, the ruling given is that of dis-
approval and the recommendation of leaving it alone. We maintain that
it is found property whose loss is likely, therefore, taking possession is
recommended followed by identification so that the wealth of the public
does not suffer a loss, just like the case of goats.
If the finder of property undertakes expenditure on it without the
permission of the judge then such expenditure will be considered a
donation, due to the lack of authority on his part over the liability of the
owner. If he spends with the permission of the judge then it will amount
to a debt against the owner, because the qãdi has authority over the wealth
of the missing person for his interest. His interests are preserved through
expenditure, as we will elaborate.
When the matter is referred to the qa4i, he is to examine it. If the
animal has some utility, he is to give it on rent and spend on it from
the rent received. The reason is that in this there is the survival of the
corpus by keeping it in the ownership of the owner without placing the
obligation of a debt on him. He does the same with a runaway slave. If the
animal does not have such utility, and he fears that the expenditure will
consume its value, he is to sell it and preserve its price, so as to preserve
in meaning when it is difficult to preserve it in substance. If it is better to
spend on it, he is to permit this (to the finder) and deem the expenditure
to be a debt against the liability of the owner, for he has been appointed
to watch over interests, and in this there is the securing of the interests of
both sides. The jurists (Mashã'ikh) said that he is to order expenditure for
two or three days estimating the time in which the owner is likely to turn
up. If the owner does not come, he is to order the sale of the property,
because the continued incurring of expenditure will lead to the loss of
the property, therefore, his interest is not secured through expenditure
over a long period.
The Author (God be pleased with him) said: In Kitãb al-Asl the stip-
ulation of testimony (on the part of the finder) is made, which is correct.
The reason is that such property may be in his possession as usurped
property, in which case he is not to order expenditure rather he is to order
its custody by way of deposit. Accordingly, it is essential to require testi-
mony so as to uncover the true situation. The testimony given here is

--- Page 1080 ---

364(cid:9) Al-Hidayah(cid:9) BOOK XV: FOUND PROPERTY
not for purposes of adjudication.' If the finder says that he has no sup-
porting testimony, then the judge is to say to him, "Spend on it if you are
speaking the truth with respect to your claim:' Consequently, he will have
recourse to the owner if he is truthful, but he will not if he is a usurper.
His statement in the Book "and he is to deem the expenditure as a debt
against the owner' is an indication of the direction that he has recourse
to the owner if he turns up, but he is not to sell the found property if the
qadi has stipulated recourse to the owner. This is one narration, and it is
correct.
He said: When he appears, that is, the owner then the finder has the
right to refuse delivery till he presents the amount incurred as expen-
diture. The reason is that the property is alive due to his expenditure. It
is as if he is regaining ownership through him, and in this it resembles
sold property. A closer case is that of one returning a runaway slave for
he has the right to imprison the slave till the payment of the reward (ju'l),
due to what we have mentioned. Thereafter, the debt arising as a result of
expenditure is not extinguished due to the death of the property in the
possession of the finder prior to restraining it, but it is extinguished if it
dies after imprisonment (restraining), because by restraining it becomes
like mortgaged property.
He said: Property found in the Hil and the Haram are the same.
AI-Shãfi'i (God bless him) said that it is obligatory to undertake identifi-
cation of the property found in the Haram till the owner appears, due to
the words of the Prophet (God bless him and grant him peace), "Property
found in the Haram is not lawful, except for one who identifies it's We
rely on the saying of the Prophet (God bless him and grant him peace),
"Preserve its container and rope, and then have it identified for a year."4
This does not give details. The reason is that it is found property and in
giving it away as charity after the passage of the period of identification
there is the preservation of the ownership of the owner in some respects,
therefore, he can come to own it as in the case of other types of found
property. The interpretation of what he has related is that taking pos-
session of found property is not permitted except for identification. The
mentioning of the Haram is for the reason that this will not do away with
'Testimony is given against a litigant who denies, but there is no one here to oppose
the request. It is merely to discover the nature of the property.
3ft is recorded by al-Bukhãri and Muslim. A1-Zayla'i, vol. 3, 467.
41t is recorded by all the six Imams of the sound compilations. A1-Zayla'i, vol. 3, 468.

--- Page 1081 ---

BOOK XV: FOUND PROPERTY(cid:9) Al-Hidãyah(cid:9) 365
the requirement of identification as it is a place that is obviously for the
poor.
He said: If a man comes and claims the property it is not to be given
to him until he brings testimony to the effect. If he does provide its iden-
tifying marks, it becomes lawful for the finder to give it to him, but he is
not to be compelled to do so through adjudication. Mãlik and al-Shãfi'i
(God bless him) said that he is to be compelled. The identifying marks are
like stating the weight of the dirhams and their number, identifying the
rope that ties them or the purse. These two jurists argue that the person in
possession disputes the possession and not ownership, therefore, descrip-
tion alone is stipulated due to the existence of a dispute in some respects.
The rendering of testimony is not stipulated due to the non-existence of
the dispute in other respects. We maintain that possession is the intended
right like ownership, therefore, he is not entitled to it without proof, and
that is testimony on the analogy of ownership, except that it is lawful for
him to deliver it due to the correct statement of the marks of identifica-
tion. This is based upon the saying of the Prophet (God bless him and
grant him peace), "If the owner appears and identifies it container and
number, deliver it to him."' The rule of permissibility is made by act-
ing upon the well known tradition, which is the saying of the Prophet
(God bless him and grant him peace), "Testimony is the obligation of the
plaintiff."' He is to take a surety for him for strengthening the transac-
tion. There is no disagreement in this, because he is seeking the surety
for himself as distinguished from an heir who is missing. It is said that if
he does deem him truthful, he is not to be compelled to deliver, like the
agent for taking possession of a deposit when he is deemed truthful. It is
also said that he is to be compelled, because the owner in this case is not
obvious, while the owner depositor is known.
The found property is no to be donated by way of charity to a rich
person, because the thing ordered is the giving of charity, due to the say-
ing of the Prophet (God bless him and grant him peace), "If he does not
turn up' that is, the owner, "then donate it by way of charity."7 Charity
51t is recorded by Muslim. A1-Zayla'i, vol. 3, 468.
6The details of this tradition are provided in the chapter on da'wã. Al-Zayla'i, vol. 3,
468.
7This has preceded, and is recorded by al-Dar'qutni and others. A1-Zayla'i, vol. 3,
468.

--- Page 1082 ---

366(cid:9) Al-Hidayah(cid:9) BOOK XV: FOUND PROPERTY
is not meant for the rich person, and in this it resembles the obligatory
charity (zakãt).
If the finder of property is rich, it is not lawful for him to utilise the
found property. A1-Shãfi'i (God bless him) said that it is permitted due
to the saying of the Prophet (God bless him and grant him peace) in a
tradition from Ubayy (God be pleased with him), "If the owner comes
deliver it to him otherwise utilise it' although he was a rich person.' The
reason is that it is permissible for the poor person so that he may agree to
take care of it, but this attribute is shared by the rich person. We main-
tain that it is the wealth of another person, therefore, its utilisation is
not permitted without his permission, due to the unqualified meaning
in the texts, while the permissibility for the poor person is due to what
we related or due to consensus (ijmã'). Accordingly, what is beyond this
(the rich man) continues to be governed by the original prohibition. The
meaning of "rich person" can be construed from the tradition to apply to
possibility of his need during the period of identification, while the poor
man may be reluctant to accept it during this period. Further, utilisation
by Ubayy (God be pleased with him) was based on permission by the
Imãm, and this permitted with his consent.
If the finder of the property is poor then there is no harm if he utilises
it himself, insofar as there is the securing of interests in this from both
sides. It is for the same reason that it is permitted to give it to a poor
person other than him.
Likewise if the poor person is his father, his son or his wife, if he
himself is rich, due to what we have said. Allah knows best.
8ft is recorded in the two Sahihs. A1-Zayla'i, vol. 3, 469.

--- Page 1083 ---

Al- Hidãyah
BOOK SIXTEEN
Ibaq
(Runaway Slaves)
Ch. iii: The Legal Status of the Runaway Slave(cid:9) 369
Ch. 122: Returning the Slave and Compensation(cid:9) 371

--- Page 1084 ---

368(cid:9) Al-Hidayah(cid:9) BOOK XVI: RUNAWAY SLAVES

--- Page 1085 ---

Chapter
121
The Legal Status of the Runaway Slave
Capturing the runaway slave is preferable for the person who has the
strength to capture him, insofar as there is the revival of the right of the
master in it. As for the lost slave, it is said that the same applies to him.
It is also said that leaving him alone is better, because he is not likely to
depart from his location, and this will lead to the owner discovering him,
but this is not the case with the runaway slave. Thereafter, the person who
captures the runaway slave brings him before the sultan, because he is not
able to take care of him on his own, as distinguished from found property.
When the runaway is brought to the sultan, he is to imprison him, but if
the lost slave is brought to him he is not to imprison him. The reason is
that he cannot be sure that the runaway will not run away a second time,
as distinguished from the lost slave.
If a person brings back the runaway slave to his master from a dis-
tance of three days journey or more, then the reward of forty dirhams is
due from the master to this person. If it is a distance that is less than this,
then he is to be paid according to the estimated reward. This is based
upon istihsãn. Analogy dictates that there is no reward for him, unless
it was stipulated. This is the opinion of al-Shãfi'i (God bless him). The
reason is that he is voluntarily donating the benefits, therefore, it resem-
bles the case of the lost slave. We rely on the report that the Companions
(God be pleased with them) agreed upon the obligation of ju '1 in princi-
ple, except that there were some among them who determined a reward of
forty, while there were others who determined it to be less. Consequently,
we determined it to be forty for the minimum distance of a journey and
less than that for a smaller journey by reconciling and combining the
varying reports. The reason is that the imposition of reward is construed
369

--- Page 1086 ---

370(cid:9) Al-Hidayah(cid:9)
BOOK XVI: RUNAWAY SLAVES
in principle to ensure return, because securing voluntary is rare, thus, it
achieves the preservation of the wealth of the people. Such estimation is
on the basis of transmitted evidence and there is no report with respect
to the lost slave, therefore, the analogy is prevented. Further, the need to
take into custody the lost slave is less than that of the runaway, because
the lost slave does not hide, while the runaway conceals himself. The esti-
mation of the reward in case of return from a distance that is less than
that of a journey depends upon their agreement or is left to the discre-
tion of the qãdi. It is said that the forty dirhams are to be divided over
three days as this is the minimum duration of a journey.
He said: If the value of the slave is less than forty, he is to be awarded
the value less one dirham. The Author (God be pleased with him) said:
This is the opinion of Muhammad (God bless him). Abü Yüsuf (God
bless him) said that he is entitled to forty dirhams, because this deter-
mination was established by the text, therefore, the reward is not to be
reduced. Consequently, it is not permitted to negotiate a higher amount,
as distinguished from negotiation for less, because that is reduction on
the bounty-hunter's part. Muhammad (God bless him) argues that the
purpose is to encourage another to return him so that the wealth of the
owner is revived. Accordingly, a dirham is reduced so that he is said to
deliver something to him and leads to the realisation of a benefit. The
umm al-walad and the mudabbar in this respect are the same as the reg-
ular slave when the return of the slave is made within the lifetime of the
master as in this is the revival of his ownership. If they are returned after
his death there is no ju'l for them, because they are emancipated with his
death, as distinguished from the regular slave. If the person bringing back
the slave is the father of the master, or his son, and he is among his depen-
dents, or one spouse does it for the other, then there is no ju'l, because
these persons undertake the return voluntarily, and they are not included
in the unqualified implication of the statement in the Book.

--- Page 1087 ---

Chapter
122
Returning the Slave and Compensation
He said: If the slave runs away from the custody of one who was return-
ing him, then he is not liable for anything. The reason is that he is a
trust in his possession, but it applies where he took witnesses, and we
have mentioned this in the topic of found property. The Author (God be
pleased with him) said: It is mentioned in some manuscripts that he is
not entitled to anything, and this too is true, because he is like the seller
in relation to the owner. It is for this reason that he is to keep the runaway
restrained till he receives the reward with the same status as the seller who
restrains the sold property so as to claim the price. Likewise if the slave
dies in his custody, he is not liable for anything, on the basis of what we
said.
He said: If the master emancipates him as soon as he meets him, he
is deemed to have taken possession through the emancipation. As in the
case of the purchased slave. Likewise if he sells him to the person return-
ing him so as to deliver the counter-value to him. Returning the slave has
the huktn of sale, but it is sale in some respects alone, for it does not fall
under the proscription laid down about the sale of something that is not
taken into possession, thus, it is permitted (even without possession).
He said: It is essential that when he captures him he take witnesses
to the effect that he is taking him into custody to return him. Taking
of witnesses is obligatory upon him for such custody according to the
opinion of Abü Hanifah and Muhammad (God bless them) so much so
that if a person returns him without taking witnesses there is no ju'l for
him in their opinion. The reason is that the relinquishing of witnesses is
evidence of the fact that he captured him for himself. It is as if he bought
him from someone who took him into custody or received him through a
371

--- Page 1088 ---

372(cid:9) Al-Hidayah(cid:9) BooK XVI: RUNAWAY SLAVES
gift or inherited him, and when such a person returns him to the master
there is no ju'l for him, because he is returning him for himself, unless
he takes witnesses that he is buying him for returning him to his master,
in which case he will be entitled to ju'l, but he is making a voluntary
donation in the payment of the price.
If the runaway slave had been pledged then the ju'l (reward) is to be
paid by the pledgee, because he revived his financial value through the
return, and that is his right. The reason is that satisfaction of his claim
is through this value and the reward is in lieu of the revival of the value,
therefore, he is liable for the reward. Return during the lifetime of the
pledgor or after it is the same, because the pledge is not annulled due to
death. He is liable for the reward when the value of the slave is equal to the
debt or less than it. If it is more than this then it is estimated in the ratio
of the debt and the rest is to to be paid by the pledgor, because his right is
involved to the extent of the liability for loss. It, thus, resembles the price
of the medicine or retrieving him through ransom after the omission of
an offence. If the slave is under debt (being an authorised slave) then the
master if the master sells him choosing to repay the debt, he begins by
paying the ju'l first and the rest is for the creditors, because the reward is
a burden on ownership and ownership in the slave is suspended. The ju'l
becomes obligatory on the person for whom the ownership is established.
If the slave is an offender, then if the master decides to pay ransom so as
to reclaim the benefit, he is obliged to pay the reward. It is to be paid by
the awliya', due to the return of the benefit to them, if the master decides
to deliver him to them. If the slave had been gifted then it is due from
the person to whom he had been gifted, even if the person gifting revokes
the gift after the return of the slave. The reason is that the benefit did not
accrue to the donor as a result of the return of the slave, but due to the
donee's relinquishing transactions in the slave after his return. If the slave
was owned by a minor, then the ju'l is to be paid from his wealth as it is
a burden of his ownership. If his guardian (wasi) returns the slave, then
there is no ju'l for him, because causing the slave to return is part of his
duties. Allah knows what is correct.

--- Page 1089 ---

Al- Hidãyah
BOOK SEVENTEEN
Mafqud
(Missing Person
Ch. 123: The Missing Person and his Wealth(cid:9)
375
Ch. 124: The Wife of the Missing Person(cid:9)
379

--- Page 1090 ---

374(cid:9) Al-Hidyah(cid:9) BOOK XVII: MISSING PERSON

--- Page 1091 ---

Chapter
123
The Missing Person and his Wealth
If a man disappears and his whereabouts (place of his location) are not
known nor is it known whether he is alive or dead, the qadi is to appoint
a person who will preserve his wealth, manage his affairs and secure his
claims. The reason is that the qadi appoints an administrator for all those
who are unable to administer their own affairs. The missing person has
these attributes and has become more like a minor or insane person. In
the appointment of an administrator for his wealth and an executor for
his affairs, the qadi is performing his supervisory function. His statement
(in the matn), "secure his claims" means that it is not known whether he
(the mafqud) took possession of his revenue, or took possession of his
claim that has been acknowledged by one of his debtors, when all this
pertains to the category of administration. He is to institute litigation for
the recovery of debts arising out of his contacts, because he is now the
principal for securing his rights. He is not to initiate litigation in mat-
ters for which authority was delegated to the mafqud (wilãyah) nor for
his share in real estate or goods that are in possession of another per-
son. The reason is that he is neither the owner nor his deputy; he is an
agent authorised by the qadi to take things into possession. He is not
authorised to undertake litigation (of all types) according to the unan-
imous view. There is disagreement about litigation when he is an agent
for taking possession of debt claims on behalf of the owner. As there is
disagreement, his acts are to be approved judicially against the missing
person. His acts are not valid, unless they are approved by the qadi, who
gives a decision, as this is a matter that is subject to ijtihãd. Thereafter, in
things that he fears wastage, they are to be sold by the qãdi if he is unable
375

--- Page 1092 ---

376(cid:9) Al-Hidayah(cid:9) BOOK XVII: MISSING PERSON
to preserve them in their original form. This means that he is to preserve
them in meaning (value, through the sale).
He is not to sell things in which there is no likelihood of wastage for
the sake of maintenance or other reasons. The reason is that he does not
possess authority (wilãyah) over the missing person, except in matters
that will preserve his wealth, therefore, he is not at liberty to go beyond
the preservation of the form when that is possible.
He is to spend on his wife and children out of his wealth. This rule
is not confined to his children alone, but in general for all close relatives
of his children. The principle is that whoever is entitled to maintenance
out of his wealth during his presence, without a decision from the qadi,
is to be provided maintenance from his wealth during his absence. The
reason is that a judicial order lends support to it. To each person who is
not entitled to maintenance out of his wealth during his absence, because
maintenance in such cases is through a judicial pronouncement against a
person not present is not permissible. The first priority is that of minor
children and old women to whom are linked old males as well. In the
second level are brothers, sisters, maternal uncles and aunts.
His statement,' "out of his wealth' means dirhams and dinars. The
reason is that their right pertains to food and clothing, and when this not
found in his wealth, the satisfaction of this right is in need of a judicial
pronouncement for conversion into value, and these are the two curren-
cies. Metal (gold and silver) dust has the same status for this rule as it is
a suitable for valuation like currencies. This (that we have stated) is the
case when the wealth is in the possession of the qädi. If the wealth is in the
shape of a deposit or a debt he is to spend out of it on them, if the custo-
dian and debtor are acknowledging the debt and the deposit along with
the existence of marriage (between the mafqud and the beneficiary) and
paternity, and this is so when these facts have not already been proved
before the qãdi. If the facts stand proved before him, there is no need for
an acknowledgement. If one of the categories stands proved—deposit and
debt or marriage and paternity—he is to stipulate acknowledgement for
what is not proved. This is the sound view. If the custodian or the debtor
pay without the order of the qadi, he is to hold the custodian liable and
is not to absolve the debtor, because they have not paid to the one who
rightfully owns the claim nor to his representative. This is different from
'Al-Quduri's.

--- Page 1093 ---

BOOK XVII: MISSING PERSON(cid:9) A1-Hid4yah(cid:9) 377
the case where they pay on the order of the qadi, because the qadi is his
representative.
If the custodian and the debtors deny the claims themselves or deny
the existence of marriage or paternity, he is not to treat one the bene-
ficiaries of the claim as parties to the litigation, because what they claim
belongs to the missing person and has not been ascertained as proof of the
existence of their right, which is maintenance. The reason is that mainte-
nance just as it is due from this wealth is due from other wealth owned
by the missing person.

--- Page 1094 ---

378(cid:9) Al-Hidãyah(cid:9) BOOK XVII: MISSING PERSON

--- Page 1095 ---

Chapter
124
The Wife of the Missing Person
He said: He (the qadi) is not to cause a separation (divorce) between
him and his wife. Mãlik (God bless him) said that when four years have
passed, the qadi is to pronounce a separation between him and his wife.
She is to undergo the waiting period of one whose husband has died,
and may then marry whom she likes. The reason is that 'Umar (God
be pleased with him) gave this decision' in the case of a man who was
enchanted away by spirits at Medina, and he ('Umar) is suffices as an
imam in this. Further, he (the husband) has denied her rights by disap-
pearing, therefore, the qãdi is to cause a separation between them after
the passage of time on the analogy of ha' and impotence, and after this
analogy he is to take the number four from ha' and years from the rule of
impotence acting on the common attributes of both.
We rely on the saying of the Prophet (God bless him and grant him
peace), "She is his wife till she receives clear evidence."' We also rely on
the statement of 'All (God be pleased with him) about such a woman that
"She is a woman subjected to a trial. She is to wait patiently till death (of
the mafqud) becomes evident or divorce is communicated to her."3 This
amounts to an elaboration of the term "evidence" stated in the marfu' tra-
dition. Further, the proof of nikãh was established, absence does not lead
to separation (divorce), death continues to be in the realm of probabil-
ity, therefore, the termination of marriage continues to be uncertain. In
addition to this, 'Umar (God be pleased with him) changed his opinion
'It is related by Ibn Abi Shaybah in his Musannif in the chapter on nikäh, by 'Abd
al-Razzaq, and by al-Dar'qutni. Al-Zayla'i, vol. 3, 471-72.
2 1t is recorded by al-Dar'qutni. Al-Zayla'i, vol. 3, 473.
31t is related in al-Musannif by 'Abd al-Razzaq. A1-Zayla'I, vol. 3, 473.
379

--- Page 1096 ---

380(cid:9) Al-Hidãyah(cid:9)
BOOK XVII: MISSING PERSON
to that of 'All (God be pleased with him). There is no similarity with ha'
as that is prompt divorce, which is considered delayed in the law, thus,
becoming a basis for separation. There is also no similarity with impo-
tency, because absence is usually followed by return, while impotence
rarely leads to recovery if it continues for a year.
He said: When he completes one hundred and twenty years from the
date of his birth, a proclamation of his death is to be made. He (the
Author, God be pleased with him) said: This is the narration of al-klasan
from Abü Hanifah (God bless him). In the authentic narration of the
School, it is to be estimated through ages of his contemporaries. In the
report from Abü YUsuf (God bless him), it is said to be one hundred
years. Some of them determined it to be ninety years. The view that con-
forms most with analogy is that no standard be used to determine the
period, while a compassionate view is that it be determined to be ninety
years.
When a proclamation of his death is made, his wife is to observe the
waiting period following death commencing from the time of the procla-
mation. His wealth is to be distributed among his heirs who are present
at the time of the proclamation. It is as if he had died at that time with his
death being witnessed. The reason is that the legal ruling is based upon
the actual ruling.
An heir who dies before this is not to inherit from him. The reason
is that the ruling of his death was not given during his life and it was as if
the fact of his being alive was known.
The mafqud (missing person) is not to inherit from anyone during
his absence. The reason is that presumption of his being alive is based
upon the presumption of continuity (istishãb al-hall) and that is not
deemed a sufficient proof for establishing rights.
Likewise, if a bequest is made in favour of the mafqnd and the person
making the bequest dies. Thereafter, the principle is that if there is an heir
inheriting along with the mafqud, who is not excluded by him, but whose
share is reduced by him, he will be given the lesser share and the rest will
be kept in suspension. If there is with him a relative who is excluded by
him, he will not be given a share at all. The elaboration of this principle
is: If a man dies leaving behind two daughters, a missing son, a son's son
and a son's daughter. The wealth is in the hands of a stranger and they
verify that the son is missing. If the two daughters demand their inheri-
tance, they will be given one-half as that is certain and the remaining half

--- Page 1097 ---

BOOK XVII: MISSING PERSON(cid:9) Al-Hidãyah(cid:9) 381
will be suspended. The son's children will not be given anything as they
are excluded by the mafqud had he been alive. They are not entitled to
inheritance on the basis of doubt.
The stranger is not to be dispossessed of the (remaining) wealth,
unless he is shown to be dishonest. The similarity of this case is with
pregnancy. Inheritance equal to the share of one son is held in abeyance
according to the ruling fatwa. If, however, there is another heir with him
whose share is neither eliminated not altered by the foetus, he is to be
given his entire share. If there is an heir whose share can be eliminated by
the foetus, he will not be given his share. If there is an heir whose share
can be altered by the birth of the foetus, he is to be given the least share
that is certain, as in the case of the mafqud. We have elaborated this in
Kifayat al-Muntahi in greater detail. Allah knows best and to Him return
all things for decision.

--- Page 1098 ---

382(cid:9) Al-Hidayah(cid:9) BOOK XVII: MISSING PERSON
The second volume of al-Hidayah ends here. The third volume
follows this and begins with "The Book of Partnership (Sharikah)."

--- Page 1099 ---

GLOSSARY

--- Page 1100 ---

384(cid:9) Al-Hidayah(cid:9) GLOSSARY

--- Page 1101 ---

Glossary
'abd: slave.
'abd ma'dhün: slave authorised by the master to trade on his behalf
adab: court procedure; code of judicial conduct.
'adãlah: moral probity.
adillah: pl. of dali!. The texts and the evidences in the texts that are the
sources of the law. The general evidences for the law that contain
within them the specific evidences. The Qur'an, for example, is a
general evidence, while a verse of the Qur'an pointing to a hukm is
a specific evidence or the dalil tafsili.
'ad!: justice.
'afw: forgiveness; commutation of sentence; surplus.
ahkm: pl. of hukm (rule).
ahi al-baghy: those who rebel against lawful authority. Those who sup-
port such authority are called ahl al-'adl.
ahliyyah: legal capacity.
ajr: wages; reward.
'aliqah: another name for mahr.
amah: slave-girl.
amãn: undertaking of safe-custody for a foreigner or for a harbi (enemy).
amir: governor; ruler.
amwal batinah: invisible wealth.
'anwatan: conquest after mobilisation of the armies.
'aqd: knot; tie; contract.

--- Page 1102 ---

386(cid:9) Al-Hidayah(cid:9) GLOSSARY
'aqilah: clan or group responsible for paying diyah for a member.
'aql: reason.
arkän: pl. of rukn; essential elements.
arsh: estimated compensation for injury.
'asabiyyah: family ties or bond.
'ataq: the act of emancipating a slave; manumission.
awliya': those granted authority or guardianship by the shari'ah as dis-
tinguished from guardians appointed by the awliyã' or the court.
'ayn: something that can be taken into physical possession as distin-
guished from rights.
'azi: ejaculation outside the vagina to prevent conception.
Win: irrevocable divorce.
baras: skin disease.
bayt al-mal: treasury.
baynunah: the state of irrevocable separation.
Mang. hemp. The plant from which intoxicating substances are derived.
bughat: rebels.
bulugh: the age of puberty.
dali!: evidence. See adillah.
dam: sacrifice by way of atonement.
damãn: compensation; liability.
dãr: house; territory.
dar al-harb: enemy territory.
dar al-Islam: the Muslim lands.
da'wah: claim.
dayn: debt; also applied to dinars and dirhams, that is, currency.
Dhimmi: non-Muslim citizen of the Islamic state who is supposed to
have entered the contract of dhimmah, actual or implied.

--- Page 1103 ---

Al-Hidayah(cid:9) 387
GLOSSARY(cid:9)
dhimmah: the equivalent of legal personality in positive law. A recepta-
cle for the capacity for acquisition. Liability. A contract of liability
entered into with non-Muslim citizens by the Islamic state.
diwn: the treasury.
diyah: compensation for bodily offences.
diyanah: honesty; moral uprightness.
diyanatan: something that is morally wrong even though the law chooses
to ignore it; moral verdict.
diyat: p1. of diyah.
faqir: needy.
frr: person evading the rules of inheritance.
fasid: not valid; irregular; vitiated. It is also used in the sense of voidable
in the positive law. A contract, however, is voidable at the option
of the parties, while the fasid contract can become valid only if the
offending condition is removed. It is an unenforceable contract.
fatwa: pl. fatawa. Legal rulings issued by the jurist.
fay': booty.
fidyah: ransom.
fitnah: evil; trial; disruption; insurrection.
fuduli: unauthorised agent.
ghalizah: heavy; enhanced.
ghzi: veteran soldier.
ghanimah: spoils of war.
gharib: strange; stranger. In the context of traditions it refers to a report
whose text or isnãd are not known. A principle or rule that is alien
to the generally acknowledged propositions of the law.
gharim: debtor.
ghasb: usurpation; misappropriation; abduction.
hadanah: Custody of the child after divorce or death of husband.
hadd: fixed penalties. See also hudüd.
hãkim: the Lawgiver.

--- Page 1104 ---

388(cid:9) Al-Hidayah(cid:9) GLOSSARY
halal: lawful.
haqiqiyyah: actual as distinguished from legal.
harãm: prohibited.
iarbi: enemy
asan: good.
hasr: siege; confinement.
hawl: one year. A period necessary for the imposition of zakãt.
hayd: menstruation.
hibah: gift.
hidad: mourning after divorce or death. Also thdãd.
hikmah: wisdom; rationale of the rule.
hirz: place of safe-custody of property with reference to theft (sariqah).
hudüd: p1. of hadd.
hujjah: proof; demonstrative proof. An evidence in the sources that
forms the basis of persuasive legal reasoning.
hukm: rule; injunction; prescription. The word hukm has a wider mean-
ing than that implied by most of the words of English deemed its
equivalent. Technically, it means a communication from Allah, the
Exalted, related to the acts of the subjects through a demand or
option, or through a declaration.
hukmiyyah: legal as distinguished from actual.
hukm shar'i: see hukm. The term hukm shar'i is used to apply to its three
elements: the Lawgiver (Hakim); the mahküm fl/i or the act; and
the subject or mahküm 'alayh.
huquq: p1. of haqq (right).
i'arah: commodate loan.
ibaq: running away; runaway slave.
ibn sabil: one destitute in a foreign land.
'iddah: waiting period after divorce or death of husband.
ijãrah: hire; leasing.

--- Page 1105 ---

Al-Hidàyah(cid:9) 389
GLOSSARY(cid:9)
ikhtiyãr: volition; choosing in the context of divorce where the right of
divorce has been delegated to the wife.
ikhtiyarah: a single repudiation when the wife decides to choose divorce.
ili: vow of continence. It is the swearing of an oath by a man that he will
not have intercourse with his wife, for a period of four or more
months.
'illah: the underlying legal cause of a hukm, its ratio decidendi, on the
basis of which the accompanying hukm is extended to other cases.
imam: Muslim ruler; the person leading prayers.
'innin: impotent person.
istihãdah: extended or chronic menstrual bleeding.
istihsãn: the principle according to which the law is based upon a gen-
eral principle, given preference over strict analogy pertaining to the
issue. The principle is used by the Hanafis as well as the Mãlikis.
This method of interpretation may be employed for various rea-
sons including hardship.
istikhlafi irregular, extended or chronic bleeding.
istishãb: presumption of continuity of a rule or of its absence. A princi-
ple within the Shah system, which means that the status quo shall
be maintained. In a more technical sense, it means that the original
rule governing an issue shall remain operative. In such a case, the
primary rule assigned to all issues is that of permissibility.
'itq: emancipation of a slave; manumission.
j'iz: permitted; a terminable contract.
jabr: compulsion; used for mandatory atonement for violation of rights.
jaldah: stripes; lashes.
jarib: measure used for land.
jihad: war.
jinäyah: offence; tort; delict.
jizyah: poll-tax.
ju 'älah: reward; general offer of reward for doing something.
kafalah: surety; guaranty.

--- Page 1106 ---

390(cid:9) Al-Hidayah(cid:9)
GLOSSARY
kaffarah: expiation.
kawaghid: papers.
khamr: wine.
kharäj: tax imposed on lands belonging to the Dhimmis.
khata': mistake.
khayl: horses.
khilaft disagreement of the jurists.
khilafah: caliphate.
khitäb: communication.
khiyar: option.
khiyar al-bulugh: option of puberty.
khiyar al-sharp option stipulated in a contract.
khul: redemption in marriage. Payment by woman to seek release from
marriage.
khums: fifth of the spoils.
kitabah: the contract with a slave for his emancipation on payment of
installments.
laqit: foundling.
li'an: imprecation. A procedure followed when the husband accuses his
wife of unlawful sexual intercourse for which he cannot produce
four witnesses.
luqaah: found property.
ma'afir: sheets made in Yemen.
ma'dhün: slave authorised by master to trade on his behalf.
mafqud: missing person
mahr: dower; amount paid to the wife as part of the marriage contract.
mahr al-mithi: reasonable dower.
mahram: husband or relative of the prohibited degree of marriage.
ma!: wealth; property.
marad a!-mawt: death illness; terminal illness.

--- Page 1107 ---

Al-Hidayah(cid:9) 391
GLOSSARY(cid:9)
marid: one suffering from a serious or terminal illness.
mashi'ah: leaving divorce at the discretion of the wife.
mawla: master of a slave who has been emancipated.
mawqufi suspended contract; a tradition whose chain stops at the Com-
panion.
mijann: shield.
milk al-raqabah: exclusive ownership as distinguished from possession.
milk yamin: lawful possession.
miskin: poor.
mithqal: a unit of weight for gold.
mubãra'ah: divorce granted to wife with no financial liability.
mudabbar: a slave who is to be emancipated on the death of his master.
Mudabbarah is the female slave with this status.
mudärabah: the contract in which the owner of capital bears the entire
loss.
mudãrib: the worker in the contract of mudãrabah.
mufawadah: partnership in which the partners contribute all their
wealth.
mufti: jurist who issues opinions upon request.
muharabah: war.
mudärib: working partner with no liability in a mudãrabah.
muhsan: married or once married through a valid contract.
muhsanät: married women; free women.
mukãtab: a slave who has agreed to buy his freedom by paying instal-
ments.
mursal: a tradition whose chain of transmission is not complete. The
meaning assigned to it by the Hanafis differs from that adopted by
the majority schools.
murtad: apostate.
must4aiah: a woman with extended or chronic bleeding.

--- Page 1108 ---

392(cid:9) Al-Hidayah(cid:9)
GLOSSARY
musta'min: a person visiting the dãr al-Islam on assurance of safety.
muthlah: mutilation.
muzahir: person pronouncing zihãr.
muzakki: person undertaking tazkiyat al-shuhfld.
muzar'ah: share-cropping; tenancy.
nabbash: pickpocket.
nabdh: mead of dates.
nadhr: vow.
nahr: slaughtering an animal, especially a camel, while it is standing.
nass: text of the Qur'an or the Sunnah; text of the jurist; a word whose
meaning is absolutely clear.
nifas: postnatal bleeding.
nikah: marriage contract.
nisab: minimum scale for the imposition of a duty, especially zakãt.
niyyah: intention.
nusüs: texts. See nass.
qadhfi false accusation of unlawful sexual intercourse.
qadhifi one who commits qadhf
qadi: judge.
qarn: a birth defect in a woman affecting her private parts.
qasamah: a procedure for administering oath on the people of a locality
when the offender in homicide is not known.
qat' al-ariq: highway robbery.
qat'i: definitive.
qisas: retaliation; lex talionis.
qismah: division; partition.
qital: fighting.
quri': periods of menses or purity.
radã': fosterage.

--- Page 1109 ---

GLOSSARY(cid:9) Al-Hidãyah(cid:9) 393
raj'ah: retraction of revocable divorce.
raj'i: revocable form of divorce.
rajm: stoning.
ratq: a birth defect in a woman affecting her private parts.
nba: usury; interest.
rukn: pillar. An act upon which a ritual or a contract is structured.
rushd: discretion.
sã': a cubic measure.
sabab: cause.
sadaq: dower.
sadaqah: p1. sadaqat. Charity.
sadaqat al-fitr: the amount paid before the 'Id al-fitr prayer.
safar: journey. The extent of travel that gives rise to exemptions.
safiyy: thing chosen by the imãm from the spoils prior to their distribu-
tion.
salab: belongings on the person of the warrior, like his weapons and
other things.
salam: contract in which an advance payment is made.
arfi contract of currency transactions and loans.
sariqah: theft. Also called sariqah sughra.
sariqah kubra: highway robbery.
shahadah: witnessing; testimony.
sha hid: martyr.
shar': the law. The Author uses this term in the meaning of the texts of
the Qur'an and the Sunnah as well.
shar'i: legal; prescribed by law.
sharikah: partnership.
shawkah: power.
shaykhfani: enfeebled old man.

--- Page 1110 ---

394(cid:9) Al-Hid4yah(cid:9) GLOSSARY
shibh al-'amd: quasi wilful homicide.
shubhah: p1. shubhãt. Doubt in the mind of the offender as to the legality
of the act. It is to be distinguished from doubt in the mind of the
judge during trial.
shubhahfi al-dalil: doubt with respect to the applicability of an evi-
dence.
shubhahfi al-fl'!: doubt in the commission of the act.
shubhahfi al-mahall: doubt about the object of the act.
shufah: pre-emption.
siyar: relations with non-Muslims whether in enemy territory or within
Muslim lands.
siyäsah: policy; administration of justice.
sulh: negotiated settlement; truce.
sultan: ruler.
tadbir: the act of granting emancipation to the slave after the owner's
death.
tafwid: delegation of the right of divorce to wife.
takhrij: extension of the law by reasoning from legal principles.
takhyir: the granting of a choice.
talaq: divorce.
talaq al-sunnah: divorce recommended by the Sunnah.
tamlilc granting the right of divorce, that is, making the wife own the
right to pronounce divorce.
tanfil: reward announced by the imam prior to the commencement of
battle.
taqadum: limitation; being barred by time.
taqild: following the opinion of another without lawful justification.
ta'zr: penalties subject to the discretion of the qadi or imãtn.
tazkiyat al-shuhüd: the process of establishing moral probity.
tazwij: marriage.

--- Page 1111 ---

GLOSSARY(cid:9) AI-Hidayah(cid:9) 395
umm al-walad: slave girl who has borne a child of her master. P1.
ummahãt al-awlãd
'uqr: compensation for unlawful sexual intercourse.
'urfi cusomary practice.
'urüL goods.
'ushr: ten percent charge on the produce of the land.
wãjib: obligatory.
w4jib muwassa': obligation that provides enough time for the required
act and another one like it.
wakàlah: agency.
wakll: agent.
wall: guardian granted authority by the shari'ah.
waqs: see awqãs.
waqfi charitable trust.
wala': clientage.
wall: person granted legal authority by the shari'ah over the person and
property of a minor; heir with reference to claims of retaliation and
blood-money.
waras: yellow dye.
wariq: silver.
wasaq: cubic measure equal to sixty sã's.
wasl: guardian appointed by the wall.
wasiyyah: bequest.
wilayah: delegated authority of guardian.
wujüb: obligation.
yamin: oath.
yamin ghamus: false oath.
yamin laghw: superfluous oath.
zãhir: apparent; the apparently strong opinion.

--- Page 1112 ---

396(cid:9) Al-Hidãyah(cid:9)
GLOSSARY
zãhir al-riwäyah: the authentic approved transmissions of the legal opin-
ions of the school.
zakãt: poor-due.
zäni: person who commits unlawful sexual intercourse.
zanni: probable as distinguished from definitive.
zihär: injurious assimilation. A man prohibiting for himself intercourse
with his wife by equating her with the back of his mother.
zinã: unlawful sexual intercourse.
zinã bi-al-jabr: rape.

--- Page 1113 ---

INDEX

--- Page 1114 ---

398(cid:9) Al-Hidayah(cid:9)
INDEX

--- Page 1115 ---

Index
amãn divorce
a type of combat, 298 before duel, 5
entering enemy territory, 323 during terminal illness, 7
granting entry to enemy, 325 for wealth, 32
who can provide, 297 claims of, 34
offers,
33
booty, 307 stipulating options,
34
breastfeeding, 96 in exchange for wealth, 32
raj'ah (retraction), ii
causes of divorce
terminal illness,
delay before separation, 58 3
under siege,
husband has disease, 5
59
with no liabilities,
husband insane, 35
59
impotence,
57
emancipation
wife has defect, 58
buying son, 120
wife non-virgin, 58
child of mudabbarah, 142
Christians, 341
children of slaves, 114
claim of retraction by husband, 12
claiming to be son, 109
claim of retraction by wife, 12
conditional upon service, 139
conditional divorce, 17
contingent upon payment, 137
custody of child,
79
disputes among joint owners, 119
father's sister, 8o
mother's right, during terminal illness, 128
79
mother's sister, 80 foetus, 113
no mother, for the sake of Allah, 113
79
paternal grandmother, 80 forms of, io6
legal status, 105
dãr al-harb, 324 oath of, 133
Dhimmis, 339 of pregnant woman, 113
duties of, 340 of relatives, iii
discretionary penalties one of several slaves, 127
maximum, 243 partial, 115
qadhf slave jointly owned, 116
by enemy, 242 slave mother, 143
399

--- Page 1116 ---

400(cid:9) Al-Hidiyah(cid:9) INDEX
testimony of, 131 claims of marriage, 218
through ju'ãlah, 137 confession, 208
umm al-walad, 123 minors, 217
under coercion, 113 nature of intercourse, 211
under intoxication, 113 perjury, 223
upon death of owner, 141 probity, 225
who can emancipate?, 105 rape, 221
expiation retraction of testimony, 219
fasting, 44 witnesses, 222
for zihãr, 40 found property
for vows, 158 claims on, 361
jointly owned slave, 42 in the Haram, 364
legal status of,
359
fixed penalties, 207 foundling
khamr, 229 claiming, 351
disappearance of smell, 229 legal status of, 351
mead of dates, 230 services of,
355
penalty, 231 wealth of,
355
testimony, 231
qadhf, 233 gestation period,
77
against dead person, 235 ghanimah, 301
by enemy, 240 fifth of, 309
denying paternity, 234 methods of division,
309
thsan, 233 sale of, 306
single mother, 239 shares in, 310
testimony, 207 transporting, 305
theft, 247
amputation, 251 hadãnah
from mosque, 253 Dhimmi, 82
from thief, 268 marriage by mother, 80
from treasury, 256 maternal aunt, 8o
from usurper, 267 maternal grandmother, 81
highway robbery, 279 mother leaving city, 82
mode of, 275 no female relative found, 81
mode of amputation, 265 right of mother, 79
place of safe-custody, 259 umm al-walad, 81
return of property, 272 hadd, 207
value of property, 269 confession, 210
wine drinking, 229 testimony, 207
zifla, 207 zina, 207
cases of doubt, 213 confession, 208

--- Page 1117 ---

INDEX Al-Hidyah(cid:9) 401
hudüd, 207 'iddah, 61
cases of doubt, 213 commencement of, 66
claims of marriage, 218 death of husband, 62
confession, 208, 210 denial of termination, 66
khamr, 229 Dhimmiyyah, 67
disappearance of smell, 229(cid:9) emacipation within it, 63
mead of dates, 230 freewoman, 61
penalty, 231 husband dies, 64
testimony, 231 irregular marriage, 64
mead of dates, 230 menopause, 63
minors, 217 minor, 61
nature of intercourse, 211 old woman, 61
perjury, 223 paternity of child, 65
probity, 225 pregnant woman, 62
qadhf, 233 slave, 62
against dead person, 235 slave mother, 64
by enemy, 240 terminal illness, 63
denying paternity, 234 until delivery, 62
thsan, 233 woman made to cohabit, 65
thsan, 226, 233
single mother, 239
ha' (vow of continence), 23
qat' al-tariq, 279
conditional, 25
and injuries, 281
for a stranger, 26
penalty, 280
incapable of intercourse, 26
rape, 221
intention, 27
retraction of testimony, 219
lapsing of vow, 24
sariqah, 247
less than four months, 24
amputation, 251
period, 23
from mosque, 253
repudiated wife, 26
from thief, 268
single repudiation, 23
from treasury, 256
impotence,
57
from usurper, 267
dower upon divorce,
57
hzrz, 259
wife chooses husband, 58
mode of, 275
mode of amputation, 265 jihad
return of property, 272 aniãn
value of property, 269 a type of combat, 298
testimony, 207 who can provide, 297
wine drinking, 229 carrying the Qur'an to enemy lands,
witnesses, 222 292
zinã, 207 communal obligation, 287

--- Page 1118 ---

402(cid:9) Al-Hidayah(cid:9) INDEX
invitation to accept Islam, 292 laqit
jizyah, 291 claiming, 351
legal status of, 287 legal status of, 351
minors and women, 288 services of, 355
participation of women, 293 wealth of, 355
rules of warfare, 291 li'an (imprecation), 49
spoils of war, 301 denial of paternity, 52
truce, 295 denying pregnancy, 53
breach of, 295 dumb person, 53
who can be killed, 293 form of oath, 51
jizyah (poll tax), 335 husband admits he is lying, 53
not for Arabs, 336 procedure, 50
who is liable, 336 refusal to take oath, 50
separation, 51
kaffarah, 40 single irrevocable divorce, 52
fasting, 44 wife a convict, 50
feeding the needy, 45 luqatah
for vows, 158 claims on, 361
jointly owned slave, 42 in the Haram, 364
mudabbar, 42 legal status of, 359
part of slave, 43
payment, 159 mafqud
timing, 40 and his wealth, 375
type of slave, 41 and his wife, 379
khamr (drinking wine), 229 maintenance, 85
kharaj, 329 award by judge, ioi
imposed in Iraq, 331 by missing son, ioo
land bought by Muslim, 333 by poor man, 100
khul',4 for grandparents, 97
discord, 30 for major daughter, 99
hostility, 29 for major son, 99
liability for compensation, 30 for minor children, 95, 96
meaning of, 29 for parents, 97
obtained for minor, 35 for relatives, 98
offer of, 31 for slaves, 102
payment, 30 for unbelieving parents, 97
providing surety, 36 rules of inheritance, 99
single irrevocable divorce, 29 marriage after divorce, 19
ulawful counter-value, 30 minor children
valid payment, 31 father to hire nurse, 96
khums (the fifth), 309 missing person

--- Page 1119 ---

INDEX(cid:9) Al-Hidayah(cid:9) 403
and his wealth, 375 wife leaves house, 86
and his wife, 379 wife too young, 86
mourning, 68 nafi (rewards before combat), 313
after death, 69 Non-Muslim citizens, 339
after divorce, 69 duties of, 340
after irregular marriage, 69
oaths
going out of house, 70
kinds of, 153
interaction with former husband,
71
paternity
proposal during, 70
acknowledgement by heirs, 76
residence, 71
acknowledging as son, 78
travel during, 72
after death of husband, 75
use of henna, 69
birth by slave, 78
use of oil, 69
birth in less than two years, 73
use of saffron, 69
denial by husband, 76
mubãra'ah
gestation period, 77
divorce with no liabilities, 35 minor gives birth to child, 74
muhsan, 226, 233
period of birth, 73
proof of, 73
nafaqah, 85
testimony of birth, 75
award by qadi, 89
testimony of midwife, 77
claiming previous amount, 89
poll tax, 335
death of husband after award, 89
not for Arabs, 336
for divorced wife, 93
who is liable, 336
for minor children, 95
husband a slave, 90
qadhf, 233
husband too young, 87
against dead person, 235
husband unable to pay, 88
by enemy, 240
husband well off, 88
denying paternity, 234
obligatory for husband, 85
ihsan, 233
on separation, 94 single mother, 239
payment in advance, 90 ta'zir, 242
provision of servant, 88 qat' al-tariq (highway robbery), 279
recalcitrant wife, 86 and injuries, 281
residence, 91 penalty, 280
residing with stepchildren, 91
slave wife, 90 rafah (retraction), ii
status of spouses, 85 claim by husband, 12
when husband dead, 94 claim by wife, iz
wife ill, 87 method of, ii
wife imprisoned, 87 testimony of, 12

--- Page 1120 ---

404(cid:9) Al-Hidayah(cid:9) INDEX
rape, 221 mode of, 275
rebels, 343 mode of amputation, 265
dealing with, 344 nisãb, 269
selling weapons to, 347 return of property, 272
wealth of, 345 types of hirz, 260
remarrying divorced wife, 19 slave mother, 144
after intercourse by master, 20 issues of paternity, 144
after marriage to a minor, 20 slaves
after marriage to another, 20 emancipation, 105
divorce by second husband, 21 relatives of owner, in
residence for wife, 91 runaway, 369
missing person, 92 spoils of war, 301
preventing parents from meeting synagogues and churches
her, 91 construction of,
339
when husband disappears, 91
retraction of divorce tadbir, 141
birth after two years, 16 ta'zir
last time for, 15 maximum, 243
pregnancy, 15 qadhf, 242
seclusion, 16 tazkiyat al-shuhüd, 225
slave wife, 13 terminal illness, 3
reviving barren lands, 330 bequest, 4
revocable divorce ha' during, 8
adornment after, 17 inheritance, 4
travelling with wife, 18 11ãn during, 8
runaway slaves recovery,
7
emancipating, 371 truce, 295
legal status of, 369 breach, 295(cid:9) V
pledged, 372
returning and compensation, 371 urnm al-walad, 144
Christian, 145
safe-conduct for enemies, 297 'ushr, 329
a type of combat, 298
salab (belongings of warrior), 314 vows
sariqah, 247 about dresses, 164
amputation, 251 about entering houses, 163
from mosque, 253 about riding, 167
from thief, 268 absolute and qualified, 177
from treasury, 256 and nadhr, 157
from usurper, 267 and divorce, 168
hirz, 259 buying things, 172

--- Page 1121 ---

INDEX(cid:9) Al-Hidayah(cid:9) 405
causing injury, 199 participation of women, 293
debts, 202 poll tax, 291
demanding money, 201 rules of warfare, 291
divorce, 185 truce, 295
dresses, 197 breach, 295
duration, 182 wealth seized by Unbelievers, 319
eating and drinking, 171 who can be killed, 293
emancipation, 185 wife's right to residence, 91
entering buildings, 167
expiation, 158 zihar (injurious assimilation), 37
by slave,
expiation for breaking, 153 44
fasting, 193 cohabiting with wife, 44
forms of, 156 expiation, 38
multiple, 46
ha11, 193
homicide, 199 prohibited woman, 38
jewellery, 197 several wives, 40
kinds of, 153 slave woman, 39
marriage, 189 zina
confession, 208
mun'aqidah, 153
testimony, 207
not praying, 194
of consecration, 161
prayer, 193
reciting the Qur'an, 180
sale and purchase, 189
skipping meals, 176
speaking, 179
valid and invalid, 155
visiting Makkah, 167
walking to the Haram, 193
yamin, 154
waiting period ( 'iddah), 61
war
call to arms, 288
carrying the Qur'an to enemy lands,
292
communal obligation, 287
conquests by Unbelievers, 317
invitation to accept Islam, 292
legal status of, 287
minors and women, 288

--- Page 1122 ---

406(cid:9) Al-Hidayah(cid:9) INDEX

--- Page 1123 ---

ABOUT THE TRANSLATOR
Imran Ahsan Khan Nyazee is the author of several books. Among these
are: Theories of Islamic Law: the Methodology of Ijtihãd (1994); Islamic
Jurisprudence: Usül al-Fiqh (2000); Islamic Law of Business Organisations:
Partnerships (1997); Islamic Law of Business Organisations: Corporations
(1998); Outlines of Islamic Jurisprudence (1998); The Concept of Riba and
Islamic Banking (1995); and General Principles of Criminal Law: Islamic
and Western (1998). He translated Ibn Rushd's Bidayat al-Mujtahid (The
Distinguished Jurist's Primer) in 1994 and Abü 'Ubayd ibn Sallám's Kitãb
al-Amwãl (The Book of Revenue) in 2002 into English.
After a long teaching career in law and Islamic law, he is now devot-
ing most of his time to the development of the Advanced Legal Studies
Institute as well as the Centre for Islamic Law and Legal Heritage. The
latter institution has been established for the preservation and promo-
tion of Islamic law in English. The Centre will translate the works of
the classical jurists into English with a focus on providing solutions to
modern problems. The Centre will initially publish translations of works
from the Hanafi School and then take up the works of the other schools.
The Advanced Legal Studies Institute focuses more on law, especially the
problems of legal and judicial reform in Pakistan.